Mugby Junction




"Guard! What place is this?"
"Mugby Junction, sir."
"A windy place!"
"Yes, it mostly is, sir."
"And looks comfortless indeed!"
"Yes, it generally does, sir."
"Is it a rainy night still?"
"Pours, sir."
"Open the door. I'll get out."
"You'll have, sir," said the guard, glistening with drops of wet, and looking
at the tearful face of his watch by the light of his lantern as the traveller
descended, "three minutes here."
"More, I think.-For I am not going on."
"Thought you had a through ticket, sir?"
"So I have, but I shall sacrifice the rest of it. I want my luggage."
"Please to come to the van and point it out, sir. Be good enough to look
very sharp, sir. Not a moment to spare."
The guard hurried to the luggage van, and the traveller hurried after him.
The guard got into it, and the traveller looked into it.
"Those two large black portmanteaus in the corner where your light shines.
Those are mine."
"Name upon 'em, sir?"
"Barbox Brothers."
"Stand clear, sir, if you please. One. Two. Right!"
Lamp waved. Signal lights ahead already changing. Shriek from engine.
Train gone.
"Mugby Junction!" said the traveller, pulling up the woollen muffler round
his throat with both hands. "At past three o'clock of a tempestuous morning!
So!"
He spoke to himself. There was no one else to speak to. Perhaps, though
there had been any one else to speak to, he would have preferred to speak to
himself. Speaking to himself, he spoke to a man within five years of fifty
either way, who had turned grey too soon, like a neglected fire; a man of
pondering habit, brooding carriage of the head, and suppressed internal voice;
a man with many indications on him of having been much alone.
He stood unnoticed on the dreary platform, except by the rain and by the
wind. Those two vigilant assailants made a rush at him. "Very well," said he,

yielding. "It signifies nothing to me, to what quarter I turn my face."
Thus, at Mugby Junction, at past three o'clock of a tempestuous morning,
the traveller went where the weather drove him.
Not but what he could make a stand when he was so minded, for, coming
to the end of the roofed shelter (it is of considerable extent at Mugby Junction)
and looking out upon the dark night, with a yet darker spirit-wing of storm
beating its wild way through it, he faced about, and held his own as ruggedly
in the difficult direction, as he had held it in the easier one. Thus, with a steady
step, the traveller went up and down, up and down, up and down, seeking
nothing, and finding it.
A place replete with shadowy shapes, this Mugby Junction in the black
hours of the four-and-twenty. Mysterious goods trains, covered with palls and
gliding on like vast weird funerals, conveying themselves guiltily away from
the presence of the few lighted lamps, as if their freight had come to a secret
and unlawful end. Half miles of coal pursuing in a Detective manner,
following when they lead, stopping when they stop, backing when they back.
Red hot embers showering out upon the ground, down this dark avenue, and
down the other, as if torturing fires were being raked clear; concurrently,
shrieks and groans and grinds invading the ear, as if the tortured were at the
height of their suffering. Iron-barred cages full of cattle jangling by midway,
the drooping beasts with horns entangled, eyes frozen with terror, and mouths
too: at least they have long icicles (or what seem so) hanging from their lips.
Unknown languages in the air, conspiring in red, green, and white characters.
An earthquake accompanied with thunder and lightning, going up express to
London.
Now, all quiet, all rusty, wind and rain in possession, lamps extinguished,
Mugby Junction dead and indistinct, with its robe drawn over its head, like
Caesar. Now, too, as the belated traveller plodded up and down, a shadowy
train went by him in the gloom which was no other than the train of a life.
From whatsoever intangible deep cutting or dark tunnel it emerged, here it
came, unsummoned and unannounced, stealing upon him and passing away
into obscurity. Here, mournfully went by, a child who had never had a
childhood or known a parent, inseparable from a youth with a bitter sense of
his namelessness, coupled to a man the enforced business of whose best years
had been distasteful and oppressive, linked to an ungrateful friend, dragging
after him a woman once beloved. Attendant, with many a clank and wrench,
were lumbering cares, dark meditations, huge dim disappointments,
monotonous years, a long jarring line of the discords of a solitary and unhappy
existence.
"-Yours, sir?"
The traveller recalled his eyes from the waste into which they had been
staring, and fell back a step or so under the abruptness, and perhaps the chance

appropriateness, of the question.
"O! My thoughts were not here for the moment. Yes. Yes. Those two
portmanteaus are mine. Are you a Porter?"
"On Porter's wages, sir. But I am Lamps."
The traveller looked a little confused.
"Who did you say you are?"
"Lamps, sir," showing an oily cloth in his hand, as further explanation.
"Surely, surely. Is there any hotel or tavern here?"
"Not exactly here, sir. There is a Refreshment Room here, but-" Lamps,
with a mighty serious look, gave his head a warning roll that plainly added
-"but it's a blessed circumstance for you that it's not open."
"You couldn't recommend it, I see, if it was available?"
"Ask your pardon, sir. If it was-?"
"Open?"
"It ain't my place, as a paid servant of the company to give my opinion on
any of the company's toepics," he pronounced it more like toothpicks,
"beyond lamp-ile and cottons," returned Lamps, in a confidential tone; "but
speaking as a man, I wouldn't recommend my father (if he was to come to life
again) to go and try how he'd be treated at the Refreshment Room. Not
speaking as a man, no, I would not."
The traveller nodded conviction. "I suppose I can put up in the town?
There is a town here?" For the traveller (though a stay-at-home compared with
most travellers) had been, like many others, carried on the steam winds and
the iron tides through that Junction before, without having ever, as one might
say, gone ashore there.
"O yes, there's a town, sir. Anyways there's town enough to put up in.
But," following the glance of the other at his luggage, "this is a very dead time
of the night with us, sir. The deadest time. I might a'most call it our deadest
and buriedest time."
"No porters about?"
"Well, sir, you see," returned Lamps, confidential again, "they in general
goes off with the gas. That's how it is. And they seem to have overlooked you,
through your walking to the furder end of the platform. But in about twelve
minutes or so, she may be up."
"Who may be up?"
"The three forty-two, sir. She goes off in a sidin' till the Up X passes, and
then she," here an air of hopeful vagueness pervaded Lamps, "doos all as lays
in her power."

"I doubt if I comprehend the arrangement."
"I doubt if anybody do, sir. She's a Parliamentary, sir. And, you see, a
Parliamentary, or a Skirmishun-"
"Do you mean an Excursion?"
"That's it, sir.-A Parliamentary, or a Skirmishun, she mostly doos go off
into a sidin'. But when she can get a chance, she's whistled out of it, and she's
whistled up into doin' all as," Lamps again wore the air of a highly sanguine
man who hoped for the best, "all as lays in her power."
He then explained that porters on duty being required to be in attendance
on the Parliamentary matron in question, would doubtless turn up with the gas.
In the meantime, if the gentleman would not very much object to the smell of
lamp-oil, and would accept the warmth of his little room.-The gentleman
being by this time very cold, instantly closed with the proposal.
A greasy little cabin it was, suggestive to the sense of smell, of a cabin in a
Whaler. But there was a bright fire burning in its rusty grate, and on the floor
there stood a wooden stand of newly trimmed and lighted lamps, ready for
carriage service. They made a bright show, and their light, and the warmth,
accounted for the popularity of the room, as borne witness to by many
impressions of velveteen trousers on a form by the fire, and many rounded
smears and smudges of stooping velveteen shoulders on the adjacent wall.
Various untidy shelves accommodated a quantity of lamps and oil-cans, and
also a fragrant collection of what looked like the pocket-handkerchiefs of the
whole lamp family.
As Barbox Brothers (so to call the traveller on the warranty of his luggage)
took his seat upon the form, and warmed his now ungloved hands at the fire,
he glanced aside at a little deal desk, much blotched with ink, which his elbow
touched. Upon it, were some scraps of coarse paper, and a superannuated steel
pen in very reduced and gritty circumstances.
From glancing at the scraps of paper, he turned involuntarily to his host,
and said, with some roughness-
"Why, you are never a poet, man!"
Lamps had certainly not the conventional appearance of one, as he stood
modestly rubbing his squab nose with a handkerchief so exceedingly oily, that
he might have been in the act of mistaking himself for one of his charges. He
was a spare man of about the Barbox Brothers' time of life, with his features
whimsically drawn upward as if they were attracted by the roots of his hair. He
had a peculiarly shining transparent complexion, probably occasioned by
constant oleaginous application; and his attractive hair, being cut short, and
being grizzled, and standing straight up on end as if it in its turn were attracted
by some invisible magnet above it, the top of his head was not very unlike a
lamp-wick.

"But to be sure it's no business of mine," said Barbox Brothers. "That was
an impertinent observation on my part. Be what you like."
"Some people, sir," remarked Lamps, in a tone of apology, "are sometimes
what they don't like."
"Nobody knows that better than I do," sighed the other. "I have been what
I don't like, all my life."
"When I first took, sir," resumed Lamps, "to composing little ComicSongs-like-"
Barbox Brothers eyed him with great disfavour.
"-To composing little Comic-Songs-like-and what was more hard-to
singing 'em afterwards," said Lamps, "it went against the grain at that time, it
did indeed."
Something that was not all oil here shining in Lamps's eye, Barbox
Brothers withdrew his own a little disconcerted, looked at the fire, and put a
foot on the top bar. "Why did you do it, then?" he asked, after a short pause;
abruptly enough but in a softer tone. "If you didn't want to do it, why did you
do it? Where did you sing them? Public-house?"
To which Mr. Lamps returned the curious reply: "Bedside."
At this moment, while the traveller looked at him for elucidation, Mugby
Junction started suddenly, trembled violently, and opened its gas eyes. "She's
got up!" Lamps announced, excited. "What lays in her power is sometimes
more, and sometimes less; but it's laid in her power to get up to-night, by
George!"
The legend "Barbox Brothers" in large white letters on two black surfaces,
was very soon afterwards trundling on a truck through a silent street, and,
when the owner of the legend had shivered on the pavement half an hour, what
time the porter's knocks at the Inn Door knocked up the whole town first, and
the Inn last, he groped his way into the close air of a shut-up house, and so
groped between the sheets of a shut-up bed that seemed to have been expressly
refrigerated for him when last made.

II

"You remember me, Young Jackson?"
"What do I remember if not you? You are my first remembrance. It was
you who told me that was my name. It was you who told me that on every
twentieth of December my life had a penitential anniversary in it called a
birthday. I suppose the last communication was truer than the first!"
"What am I like, Young Jackson?"
"You are like a blight all through the year, to me. You hard-lined, thinlipped, repressive, changeless woman with a wax mask on. You are like the
Devil to me; most of all when you teach me religious things, for you make me
abhor them."
"You remember me, Mr. Young Jackson?" In another voice from another
quarter.
"Most gratefully, sir. You were the ray of hope and prospering ambition in
my life. When I attended your course, I believed that I should come to be a
great healer, and I felt almost happy-even though I was still the one boarder
in the house with that horrible mask, and ate and drank in silence and
constraint with the mask before me, every day. As I had done every, every,
every day, through my school-time and from my earliest recollection."
"What am I like, Mr. Young Jackson?"
"You are like a Superior Being to me. You are like Nature beginning to
reveal herself to me. I hear you again, as one of the hushed crowd of young
men kindling under the power of your presence and knowledge, and you bring
into my eyes the only exultant tears that ever stood in them."
"You remember Me, Mr. Young Jackson?" In a grating voice from quite
another quarter.
"Too well. You made your ghostly appearance in my life one day, and
announced that its course was to be suddenly and wholly changed. You
showed me which was my wearisome seat in the Galley of Barbox Brothers.
(When they were, if they ever were, is unknown to me; there was nothing of
them but the name when I bent to the oar.) You told me what I was to do, and
what to be paid; you told me afterwards, at intervals of years, when I was to
sign for the Firm, when I became a partner, when I became the Firm. I know
no more of it, or of myself."
"What am I like, Mr. Young Jackson?"
"You are like my father, I sometimes think. You are hard enough and cold
enough so to have brought up an unacknowledged son. I see your scanty
figure, your close brown suit, and your tight brown wig; but you, too, wear a
wax mask to your death. You never by a chance remove it-it never by a
chance falls off-and I know no more of you."
Throughout this dialogue, the traveller spoke to himself at his window in

the morning, as he had spoken to himself at the Junction over-night. And as he
had then looked in the darkness, a man who had turned grey too soon, like a
neglected fire: so he now looked in the sunlight, an ashier grey, like a fire
which the brightness of the sun put out.
The firm of Barbox Brothers had been some offshoot or irregular branch of
the Public Notary and bill-broking tree. It had gained for itself a griping
reputation before the days of Young Jackson, and the reputation had stuck to it
and to him. As he had imperceptibly come into possession of the dim den up
in the corner of a court off Lombard-street, on whose grimy windows the
inscription Barbox Brothers had for many long years daily interposed itself
between him and the sky, so he had insensibly found himself a personage held
in chronic distrust, whom it was essential to screw tight to every transaction in
which he engaged, whose word was never to be taken without his attested
bond, whom all dealers with openly set up guards and wards against. This
character had come upon him through no act of his own. It was as if the
original Barbox had stretched himself down upon the office-floor, and had
thither caused to be conveyed Young Jackson in his sleep, and had there
effected a metempsychosis and exchange of persons with him. The discovery
-aided in its turn by the deceit of the only woman he had ever loved, and the
deceit of the only friend he had ever made: who eloped from him to be
married together-the discovery, so followed up, completed what his earliest
rearing had begun. He shrank, abashed, within the form of Barbox, and lifted
up his head and heart no more.
But he did at last effect one great release in his condition. He broke the oar
he had plied so long, and he scuttled and sank the galley. He prevented the
gradual retirement of an old conventional business from him, by taking the
initiative and retiring from it. With enough to live on (though after all with not
too much), he obliterated the firm of Barbox Brothers from the pages of the
Post-office Directory and the face of the earth, leaving nothing of it but its
name on two portmanteaus.
"For one must have some name in going about, for people to pick up," he
explained to Mugby High-street, through the Inn-window, "and that name at
least was real once. Whereas, Young Jackson!-Not to mention its being a
sadly satirical misnomer for Old Jackson."
He took up his hat and walked out, just in time to see, passing along on the
opposite side of the way, a velveteen man, carrying his day's dinner in a small
bundle that might have been larger without suspicion of gluttony, and pelting
away towards the Junction at a great pace.
"There's Lamps!" said Barbox Brother. "And by-the-by-"
Ridiculous, surely, that a man so serious, so self-contained, and not yet
three days emancipated from a routine of drudgery, should stand rubbing his
chin in the street, in a brown study about Comic Songs.

"Bedside?" said Barbox Brothers, testily. "Sings them at the bedside? Why
at the bedside, unless he goes to bed drunk? Does, I shouldn't wonder. But it's
no business of mine. Let me see. Mugby Junction, Mugby Junction. Where
shall I go next? As it came into my head last night when I woke from an
uneasy sleep in the carriage and found myself here, I can go anywhere from
here. Where shall I go? I'll go and look at the Junction by daylight. There's no
hurry, and I may like the look of one Line better than another."
But there were so many Lines. Gazing down upon them from a bridge at
the Junction, it was as if the concentrating Companies formed a great
Industrial Exhibition of the works of extraordinary ground-spiders that spun
iron. And then so many of the Lines went such wonderful ways, so crossing
and curving among one another, that the eye lost them. And then some of them
appeared to start with the fixed intention of going five hundred miles, and all
of a sudden gave it up at an insignificant barrier, or turned off into a workshop.
And then others, like intoxicated men, went a little way very straight, and
surprisingly slued round and came back again. And then others were so chockfull of trucks of coal, others were so blocked with trucks of casks, others were
so gorged with trucks of ballast, others were so set apart for wheeled objects
like immense iron cotton-reels: while others were so bright and clear, and
others were so delivered over to rust and ashes and idle wheelbarrows out of
work, with their legs in the air (looking much like their masters on strike), that
there was no beginning, middle, or end, to the bewilderment.
Barbox Brothers stood puzzled on the bridge, passing his right hand across
the lines on his forehead, which multiplied while he looked down, as if the
railway Lines were getting themselves photographed on that sensitive plate.
Then, was heard a distant ringing of bells and blowing of whistles. Then,
puppet-looking heads of men popped out of boxes in perspective, and popped
in again. Then, prodigious wooden razors set up on end, began shaving the
atmosphere. Then, several locomotive engines in several directions began to
scream and be agitated. Then, along one avenue a train came in. Then, along
another two trains appeared that didn't come in, but stopped without. Then,
bits of trains broke off. Then, a struggling horse became involved with them.
Then, the locomotives shared the bits of trains, and ran away with the whole.
"I have not made my next move much clearer by this. No hurry. No need
to make up my mind to-day, or to-morrow, nor yet the day after. I'll take a
walk."
It fell out somehow (perhaps he meant it should) that the walk tended to
the platform at which he had alighted, and to Lamps's room. But Lamps was
not in his room. A pair of velveteen shoulders were adapting themselves to one
of the impressions on the wall by Lamps's fireplace, but otherwise the room
was void. In passing back to get out of the station again, he learnt the cause of
this vacancy, by catching sight of Lamps on the opposite line of railway,
skipping along the top of a train, from carriage to carriage, and catching

lighted namesakes thrown up to him by a coadjutor.
"He is busy. He has not much time for composing or singing Comic Songs
this morning, I take it."
The direction he pursued now, was into the country, keeping very near to
the side of one great Line of railway, and within easy view of others. "I have
half a mind," he said, glancing around, "to settle the question from this point,
by saying, 'I'll take this set of rails, or that, or t'other, and stick to it.' They
separate themselves from the confusion, out here, and go their ways."
Ascending a gentle hill of some extent, he came to a few cottages. There,
looking about him as a very reserved man might who had never looked about
him in his life before, he saw some six or eight young children come merrily
trooping and whooping from one of the cottages, and disperse. But not until
they had all turned at the little garden gate, and kissed their hands to a face at
the upper window: a low window enough, although the upper, for the cottage
had but a story of one room above the ground.
Now, that the children should do this was nothing; but that they should do
this to a face lying on the sill of the open window, turned towards them in a
horizontal position, and apparently only a face, was something noticeable. He
looked up at the window again. Could only see a very fragile though a very
bright face, lying on one cheek on the window-sill. The delicate smiling face
of a girl or woman. Framed in long bright brown hair, round which was tied a
light blue band or fillet, passing under the chin.
He walked on, turned back, passed the window again, shyly glanced up
again. No change. He struck off by a winding branch-road at the top of the hill
-which he must otherwise have descended-kept the cottages in view,
worked his way round at a distance so as to come out once more into the main
road and be obliged to pass the cottages again. The face still lay on the
window-sill, but not so much inclined towards him. And now there were a pair
of delicate hands too. They had the action of performing on some musical
instrument, and yet it produced no sound that reached his ears.
"Mugby Junction must be the maddest place in England," said Barbox
Brothers, pursuing his way down the hill. "The first thing I find here is a
Railway Porter who composes comic songs to sing at his bedside. The second
thing I find here is a face, and a pair of hands playing a musical instrument
that don't play!"
The day was a fine bright day in the early beginning of November, the air
was clear and inspiriting, and the landscape was rich in beautiful colours. The
prevailing colours in the court off Lombard-street, London city, had been few
and sombre. Sometimes, when the weather elsewhere was very bright indeed,
the dwellers in those tents enjoyed a pepper-and-salt-coloured day or two, but
their atmosphere's usual wear was slate, or snuff colour.
He relished his walk so well, that he repeated it next day. He was a little

earlier at the cottage than on the day before, and he could hear the children upstairs singing to a regular measure and clapping out the time with their hands.
"Still, there is no sound of any musical instrument," he said, listening at
the corner, "and yet I saw the performing hands again, as I came by. What are
the children singing? Why, good Lord, they can never be singing the
multiplication-table!"
They were though, and with infinite enjoyment. The mysterious face had a
voice attached to it which occasionally led or set the children right. Its musical
cheerfulness was delightful. The measure at length stopped, and was
succeeded by a murmuring of young voices, and then by a short song which he
made out to be about the current month of the year, and about what work it
yielded to the labourers in the fields and farm-yards. Then, there was a stir of
little feet, and the children came trooping and whooping out, as on the
previous day. And again, as on the previous day, they all turned at the garden
gate, and kissed their hands-evidently to the face on the window-sill, though
Barbox Brothers from his retired post of disadvantage at the corner could not
see it.
But as the children dispersed, he cut off one small straggler-a brown
faced boy with flaxen hair-and said to him:
"Come here, little one. Tell me whose house is that?"
The child, with one swarthy arm held up across his eyes, half in shyness,
and half ready for defence, said from behind the inside of his elbow:
"Phoebe's."
"And who," said Barbox Brothers, quite as much embarrassed by his part
in the dialogue as the child could possibly be by his, "is Phoebe?"
To which the child made answer: "Why, Phoebe, of course."
The small but sharp observer had eyed his questioner closely, and had
taken his moral measure. He lowered his guard, and rather assumed a tone
with him: as having discovered him to be an unaccustomed person in the art of
polite conversation.
"Phoebe," said the child, "can't be anybobby else but Phoebe. Can she?"
"No, I suppose not."
"Well," returned the child, "then why did you ask me?"
Deeming it prudent to shift his ground, Barbox Brothers took up a new
position.
"What do you do there? Up there in that room where the open window is.
What do you do there?"
"Cool," said the child.
"Eh?"

"Co-o-ol," the child repeated in a louder voice, lengthening out the word
with a fixed look and great emphasis, as much as to say: "What's the use of
your having grown up, if you're such a donkey as not to understand me?"
"Ah! School, school," said Barbox Brothers. "Yes, yes, yes. And Phoebe
teaches you?"
The child nodded.
"Good boy."
"Tound it out, have you?" said the child.
"Yes, I have found it out. What would you do with twopence, if I gave it
you?"
"Pend it."
The knock-down promptitude of this reply leaving him not a leg to stand
upon, Barbox Brothers produced the twopence with great lameness, and
withdrew in a state of humiliation.
But, seeing the face on the window-sill as he passed the cottage, he
acknowledged its presence there with a gesture, which was not a nod, not a
bow, not a removal of his hat from his head, but was a diffident compromise
between or struggle with all three. The eyes in the face seemed amused, or
cheered, or both, and the lips modestly said: "Good day to you, sir."
"I find I must stick for a time to Mugby Junction," said Barbox Brothers,
with much gravity, after once more stopping on his return road to look at the
Lines where they went their several ways so quietly. "I can't make up my
mind yet, which iron road to take. In fact, I must get a little accustomed to the
Junction before I can decide."
So, he announced at the Inn that he was "going to stay on, for the present,"
and improved his acquaintance with the Junction that night, and again next
morning, and again next night and morning: going down to the station,
mingling with the people there, looking about him down all the avenues of
railway, and beginning to take an interest in the incomings and outgoings of
the trains. At first, he often put his head into Lamps's little room, but he never
found Lamps there. A pair or two of velveteen shoulders he usually found
there, stooping over the fire, sometimes in connexion with a clasped knife and
a piece of bread and meat; but the answer to his inquiry, "Where's Lamps?"
was, either that he was "t'other side the line," or, that it was his off-time, or (in
the latter case), his own personal introduction to another Lamps who was not
his Lamps. However, he was not so desperately set upon seeing Lamps now,
but he bore the disappointment. Nor did he so wholly devote himself to his
severe application to the study of Mugby Junction, as to neglect exercise. On
the contrary, he took a walk every day, and always the same walk. But the
weather turned cold and wet again, and the window was never open.

III

At length, after a lapse of some days, there came another streak of fine
bright hardy autumn weather. It was a Saturday. The window was open, and
the children were gone. Not surprising, this, for he had patiently watched and
waited at the corner, until they were gone.
"Good day," he said to the face; absolutely getting his hat clear off his
head this time.
"Good day to you, sir."
"I am glad you have a fine sky again, to look at."
"Thank you, sir. It is kind of you."
"You are an invalid, I fear?"
"No, sir. I have very good health."
"But are you not always lying down?"
"O yes, I am always lying down, because I cannot sit up. But I am not an
invalid."
The laughing eyes seemed highly to enjoy his great mistake.
"Would you mind taking the trouble to come in, sir? There is a beautiful
view from this window. And you would see that I am not at all ill-being so
good as to care."
It was said to help him, as he stood irresolute, but evidently desiring to
enter, with his diffident hand on the latch of the garden gate. It did help him,
and he went in.
The room up-stairs was a very clean white room with a low roof. Its only
inmate lay on a couch that brought her face on a level with the window. The
couch was white too; and her simple dress or wrapper being light blue, like the
band around her hair, she had an ethereal look, and a fanciful appearance of
lying among clouds. He felt that she instinctively perceived him to be by habit
a downcast taciturn man; it was another help to him to have established that
understanding so easily, and got it over.
There was an awkward constraint upon him, nevertheless, as he touched
her hand, and took a chair at the side of her couch.

"I see now," he began, not at all fluently, "how you occupy your hands.
Only seeing you from the path outside, I thought you were playing upon
something."
She was engaged in very nimbly and dexterously making lace. A lacepillow lay upon her breast; and the quick movements and changes of her hands
upon it as she worked, had given them the action he had misinterpreted.
"That is curious," she answered, with a bright smile. "For I often fancy,
myself, that I play tunes while I am at work."
"Have you any musical knowledge?"
She shook her head.
"I think I could pick out tunes, if I had any instrument, which could be
made as handy to me as my lace-pillow. But I dare say I deceive myself. At all
events, I shall never know."
"You have a musical voice. Excuse me; I have heard you sing."
"With the children?" she answered, slightly colouring. "O yes. I sing with
the dear children, if it can be called singing."
Barbox Brothers glanced at the two small forms in the room, and hazarded
the speculation that she was fond of children, and that she was learned in new
systems of teaching them? "Very fond of them," she said, shaking her head
again; "but I know nothing of teaching, beyond the interest I have in it, and the
pleasure it gives me when they learn. Perhaps your overhearing my little
scholars sing some of their lessons, has led you so far astray as to think me a
grand teacher? Ah! I thought so! No, I have only read and been told about that
system. It seemed so pretty and pleasant, and to treat them so like the merry
Robins they are, that I took up with it in my little way. You don't need to be
told what a very little way mine is, sir," she added, with a glance at the small
forms and round the room.
All this time her hands were busy at her lace-pillow. As they still
continued so, and as there was a kind of substitute for conversation in the click
and play of its pegs, Barbox Brothers took the opportunity of observing her.
He guessed her to be thirty. The charm of her transparent face and large bright
brown eyes, was, not that they were passively resigned, but that they were
actively and thoroughly cheerful. Even her busy hands, which of their own
thinness alone might have besought compassion, plied their task with a gay
courage that made mere compassion an unjustifiable assumption of
superiority, and an impertinence.
He saw her eyes in the act of rising towards his, and he directed his
towards the prospect, saying: "Beautiful indeed!"
"Most beautiful, sir. I have sometimes had a fancy that I would like to sit
up, for once, only to try how it looks to an erect head. But what a foolish fancy
that would be to encourage! It cannot look more lovely to any one than it does

to me."
Her eyes were turned to it as she spoke, with most delighted admiration
and enjoyment. There was not a trace in it of any sense of deprivation.
"And those threads of railway, with their puffs of smoke and steam
changing places so fast, make it so lively for me," she went on. "I think of the
number of people who can go where they wish, on their business, or their
pleasure; I remember that the puffs make signs to me that they are actually
going while I look; and that enlivens the prospect with abundance of company,
if I want company. There is the great Junction, too. I don't see it under the foot
of the hill, but I can very often hear it, and I always know it is there. It seems
to join me, in a way, to I don't know how many places and things that I shall
never see."
With an abashed kind of idea that it might have already joined himself to
something he had never seen, he said constrainedly: "Just so."
"And so you see, sir," pursued Phoebe, "I am not the invalid you thought
me, and I am very well off indeed."
"You have a happy disposition," said Barbox Brothers: perhaps with a
slight excusatory touch for his own disposition.
"Ah! But you should know my father," she replied. "His is the happy
disposition!-Don't mind, sir!" For his reserve took the alarm at a step upon
the stairs, and he distrusted that he would be set down for a troublesome
intruder. "This is my father coming."
The door opened, and the father paused there.
"Why, Lamps!" exclaimed Barbox Brothers, starting from his chair. "How
do you do, Lamps?"
To which, Lamps responded: "The gentleman for Nowhere! How do you
do, sir?"
And they shook hands, to the greatest admiration and surprise of Lamps's
daughter.
"I have looked you up, half a dozen times since that night," said Barbox
Brothers, "but have never found you."
"So I've heerd on, sir, so I've heerd on," returned Lamps. "It's your being
noticed so often down at the Junction, without taking any train, that has begun
to get you the name among us of the gentleman for Nowhere. No offence in
my having called you by it when took by surprise, I hope, sir?"
"None at all. It's as good a name for me as any other you could call me by.
But may I ask you a question in the corner here?"
Lamps suffered himself to be led aside from his daughter's couch, by one
of the buttons of his velveteen jacket.

"Is this the bedside where you sing your songs?"
Lamps nodded.
The gentleman for Nowhere clapped him on the shoulder; and they faced
about again.
"Upon my word, my dear," said Lamps then to his daughter, looking from
her to her visitor, "it is such an amaze to me, to find you brought acquainted
with this gentleman, that I must (if this gentleman will excuse me) take a
rounder."
Mr. Lamps demonstrated in action what this meant, by pulling out his oily
handkerchief rolled up in the form of a ball, and giving himself an elaborate
smear, from behind the right ear, up the cheek, across the forehead, and down
the other cheek to behind his left ear. After this operation he shone
exceedingly.
"It's according to my custom when particular warmed up by any agitation,
sir," he offered by way of apology. "And really, I am throwed into that state of
amaze by finding you brought acquainted with Phoebe, that I-that I think I
will, if you'll excuse me, take another rounder." Which he did, seeming to be
greatly restored by it.
They were now both standing by the side of her couch, and she was
working at her lace-pillow. "Your daughter tells me," said Barbox Brothers,
still in a half reluctant shamefaced way, "that she never sits up."
"No, sir, nor never has done. You see, her mother (who died when she was
a year and two months old) was subject to very bad fits, and as she had never
mentioned to me that she was subject to fits, they couldn't be guarded against.
Consequently, she dropped the baby when took, and this happened."
"It was very wrong of her," said Barbox Brothers, with a knitted brow, "to
marry you, making a secret of her infirmity."
"Well, sir," pleaded Lamps, in behalf of the long-deceased. "You see,
Phoebe and me, we have talked that over too. And Lord bless us! Such a
number on us has our infirmities, what with fits, and what with misfits, of one
sort and another, that if we confessed to 'em all before we got married, most of
us might never get married."
"Might not that be for the better?"
"Not in this case, sir," said Phoebe, giving her hand to her father.
"No, not in this case, sir," said her father, patting it between his own.
"You correct me," returned Barbox Brothers, with a blush; "and I must
look so like a Brute, that at all events it would be superfluous in me to confess
to that infirmity. I wish you would tell me a little more about yourselves. I
hardly know how to ask it of you, for I am conscious that I have a bad stiff
manner, a dull discouraging way with me, but I wish you would."

"With all our hearts, sir," returned Lamps, gaily, for both. "And first of all,
that you may know my name-"
"Stay!" interposed the visitor, with a slight flush. "What signifies your
name! Lamps is name enough for me. I like it. It is bright and expressive.
What do I want more!"
"Why to be sure, sir," returned Lamps. "I have in general no other name
down at the Junction; but I thought, on account of your being here as a firstclass single, in a private character, that you might-"
The visitor waved the thought away with his hand, and Lamps
acknowledged the mark of confidence by taking another rounder.
"You are hard-worked, I take for granted?" said Barbox Brothers, when the
subject of the rounder came out of it much dirtier than he went into it.
Lamps was beginning, "Not particular so"-when his daughter took him
up.
"O yes, sir, he is very hard-worked. Fourteen, fifteen, eighteen, hours a
day. Sometimes twenty-four hours at a time."
"And you," said Barbox Brothers, "what with your school, Phoebe, and
what with your lace-making-"
"But my school is a pleasure to me," she interrupted, opening her brown
eyes wider, as if surprised to find him so obtuse. "I began it when I was but a
child, because it brought me and other children into company, don't you see?
That was not work. I carry it on still, because it keeps children about me. That
is not work. I do it as love, not as work. Then my lace-pillow;" her busy hands
had stopped, as if her argument required all her cheerful earnestness, but now
went on again at the name; "it goes with my thoughts when I think, and it goes
with my tunes when I hum any, and that's not work. Why, you yourself
thought it was music, you know, sir. And so it is, to me."
"Everything is!" cried Lamps, radiantly. "Everything is music to her, sir."
"My father is, at any rate," said Phoebe, exultingly pointing her thin
forefinger at him. "There is more music in my father than there is in a brass
band."
"I say! My dear! It's very fillyillially done, you know; but you are
flattering your father," he protested, sparkling.
"No I am not, sir, I assure you. No I am not. If you could hear my father
sing, you would know I am not. But you never will hear him sing, because he
never sings to any one but me. However tired he is, he always sings to me
when he comes home. When I lay here long ago, quite a poor little broken
doll, he used to sing to me. More than that, he used to make songs, bringing in
whatever little jokes we had between us. More than that, he often does so to
this day. O! I'll tell of you, father, as the gentleman has asked about you. He is

a poet, sir."
"I shouldn't wish the gentleman, my dear," observed Lamps, for the
moment turning grave, "to carry away that opinion of your father, because it
might look as if I was given to asking the stars in a molloncolly manner what
they was up to. Which I wouldn't at once waste the time, and take the liberty,
my dear."
"My father," resumed Phoebe, amending her text, "is always on the bright
side, and the good side. You told me just now, I had a happy disposition. How
can I help it?"
"Well! but my dear," returned Lamps argumentatively, "how can I help it?
Put it to yourself, sir. Look at her. Always as you see her now. Always
working-and after all, sir, for but a very few shillings a week-always
contented, always lively, always interested in others, of all sorts. I said, this
moment, she was always as you see her now. So she is, with a difference that
comes to much the same. For, when it's my Sunday off and the morning bells
have done ringing, I hear the prayers and thanks read in the touchingest way,
and I have the hymns sung to me-so soft, sir, that you couldn't hear 'em out
of this room-in notes that seem to me, I am sure, to come from Heaven and
go back to it."
It might have been merely through the association of these words with
their sacredly quiet time, or it might have been through the larger association
of the words with the Redeemer's presence beside the bedridden; but here her
dexterous fingers came to a stop on the lace-pillow, and clasped themselves
round his neck as he bent down. There was great natural sensibility in both
father and daughter, the visitor could easily see; but each made it, for the
other's sake, retiring, not demonstrative; and perfect cheerfulness, intuitive or
acquired, was either the first or second nature of both. In a very few moments,
Lamps was taking another rounder with his comical features beaming, while
Phoebe's laughing eyes (just a glistening speck or so upon their lashes) were
again directed by turns to him, and to her work, and to Barbox Brothers.
"When my father, sir," she said brightly, "tells you about my being
interested in other people even though they know nothing about me-which,
by-the-by, I told you myself-you ought to know how that comes about.
That's my father's doing."
"No, it isn't!" he protested.
"Don't you believe him, sir; yes, it is. He tells me of everything he sees
down at his work. You would be surprised what a quantity he gets together for
me every day. He looks into the carriages, and tells me how the ladies are drest
-so that I know all the fashions! He looks into the carriages, and tells me
what pairs of lovers he sees, and what new-married couples on their wedding
trip-so that I know all about that! He collects chance newspapers and books
-so that I have plenty to read! He tells me about the sick people who are

travelling to try to get better-so that I know all about them! In short, as I
began by saying, he tells me everything he sees and makes out, down at his
work, and you can't think what a quantity he does see and make out."
"As to collecting newspapers and books, my dear," said Lamps, "it's clear
I can have no merit in that, because they're not my perquisites. You see, sir,
it's this way: A Guard, he'll say to me, 'Hallo, here you are, Lamps. I've saved
this paper for your daughter. How is she agoing on?' A Head-Porter, he'll say
to me, 'Here! Catch hold, Lamps. Here's a couple of wollumes for your
daughter. Is she pretty much where she were?' And that's what makes it
double welcome, you see. If she had a thousand pound in' a box, they
wouldn't trouble themselves about her; but being what she is-that is, you
understand," Lamps added, somewhat hurriedly, "not having a thousand pound
in a box-they take thought for her. And as concerning the young pairs,
married and unmarried, it's only natural I should bring home what little I can
about them, seeing that there's not a Couple of either sort in the
neighbourhood that don't come of their own accord to confide in Phoebe."
She raised her eyes triumphantly to Barbox Brothers, as she said:
"Indeed, sir, that is true. If I could have got up and gone to church, I don't
know how often I should have been a bridesmaid. But if I could have done
that, some girls in love might have been jealous of me, and as it is, no girl is
jealous of me. And my pillow would not have been half as ready to put the
piece of cake under, as I always find it," she added, turning her face on it with
a light sigh, and a smile at her father.
The arrival of a little girl, the biggest of the scholars, now led to an
understanding on the part of Barbox Brothers, that she was the domestic of the
cottage, and had come to take active measures in it, attended by a pail that
might have extinguished her, and a broom three times her height. He therefore
rose to take his leave, and took it; saying that if Phoebe had no objection, he
would come again.
He had muttered that he would come "in the course of his walks." The
course of his walks must have been highly favourable to his return, for he
returned after an interval of a single day.
"You thought you would never see me any more, I suppose?" he said to
Phoebe as he touched her hand, and sat down by her couch.
"Why should I think so!" was her surprised rejoinder.
"I took it for granted you would mistrust me."
"For granted, sir? Have you been so much mistrusted?"
"I think I am justified in answering yes. But I may have mistrusted too, on
my part. No matter just now. We were speaking of the Junction last time. I
have passed hours there since the day before yesterday."
"Are you now the gentleman for Somewhere?" she asked with a smile.

"Certainly for Somewhere; but I don't yet know Where. You would never
guess what I am travelling from. Shall I tell you? I am travelling from my
birthday."
Her hands stopped in her work, and she looked at him with incredulous
astonishment.
"Yes," said Barbox Brothers, not quite easy in his chair, "from my
birthday. I am, to myself, an unintelligible book with the earlier chapters all
torn out, and thrown away. My childhood had no grace of childhood, my youth
had no charm of youth, and what can be expected from such a lost
beginning?" His eyes meeting hers as they were addressed intently to him,
something seemed to stir within his breast, whispering: "Was this bed a place
for the graces of childhood and the charms of youth to take to, kindly? O
shame, shame!"
"It is a disease with me," said Barbox Brothers, checking himself, and
making as though he had a difficulty in swallowing something, "to go wrong
about that. I don't know how I came to speak of that. I hope it is because of an
old misplaced confidence in one of your sex involving an old bitter treachery. I
don't know. I am all wrong together."
Her hands quietly and slowly resumed their work. Glancing at her, he saw
that her eyes were thoughtfully following them.
"I am travelling from my birthday," he resumed, "because it has always
been a dreary day to me. My first free birthday coming round some five or six
weeks hence, I am travelling to put its predecessors far behind me, and to try
to crush the day-or, at all events, put it out of my sight-by heaping new
objects on it."
As he paused, she looked at him; but only shook her head as being quite at
a loss.
"This is unintelligible to your happy disposition," he pursued, abiding by
his former phrase as if there were some lingering virtue of self-defence in it: "I
knew it would be, and am glad it is. However, on this travel of mine (in which
I mean to pass the rest of my days, having abandoned all thought of a fixed
home), I stopped, as you heard from your father, at the Junction here. The
extent of its ramifications quite confused me as to whither I should go, from
here. I have not yet settled, being still perplexed among so many roads. What
do you think I mean to do? How many of the branching roads can you see
from your window?"
Looking out, full of interest, she answered, "Seven."
"Seven," said Barbox Brothers, watching her with a grave smile. "Well! I
propose to myself, at once to reduce the gross number to those very seven, and
gradually to fine them down to one-the most promising for me-and to take
that."

"But how will you know, sir, which is the most promising?" she asked,
with her brightened eyes roving over the view.
"Ah!" said Barbox Brothers, with another grave smile, and considerably
improving in his ease of speech. "To be sure. In this way. Where your father
can pick up so much every day for a good purpose, I may once and again pick
up a little for an indifferent purpose. The gentleman for Nowhere must become
still better known at the Junction. He shall continue to explore it, until he
attaches something that he has seen, heard, or found out, at the head of each of
the seven roads, to the road itself. And so his choice of a road shall be
determined by his choice among his discoveries."
Her hands still busy, she again glanced at the prospect, as if it
comprehended something that had not been in it before, and laughed as if it
yielded her new pleasure.
"But I must not forget," said Barbox Brothers, "(having got so far) to ask a
favour. I want your help in this expedient of mine. I want to bring you what I
pick up at the heads of the seven roads that you lie here looking out at, and to
compare notes with you about it. May I? They say two heads are better than
one. I should say myself that probably depends upon the heads concerned. But
I am quite sure, though we are so newly acquainted, that your head and your
father's have found out better things, Phoebe, than ever mine of itself
discovered."
She gave him her sympathetic right hand, in perfect rapture with his
proposal, and eagerly and gratefully thanked him.
"That's well!" said Barbox Brothers. "Again I must not forget (having got
so far) to ask a favour. Will you shut your eyes?"
Laughing playfully at the strange nature of the request, she did so.
"Keep them shut," said Barbox Brothers, going softly to the door, and
coming back. "You are on your honour, mind, not to open your eyes until I tell
you that you may?"
"Yes! On my honour."
"Good. May I take your lace-pillow from you for a minute?"
Still laughing and wondering, she removed her hands from it, and he put it
aside.
"Tell me. Did you see the puffs of smoke and steam made by the morning
fast-train yesterday on road number seven from here?"
"Behind the elm-trees and the spire?"
"That's the road," said Barbox Brothers, directing his eyes towards it.
"Yes. I watched them melt away."
"Anything unusual in what they expressed?"

"No!" she answered merrily.
"Not complimentary to me, for I was in that train. I went-don't open your
eyes-to fetch you this, from the great ingenious town. It is not half so large
as your lace-pillow, and lies easily and lightly in its place. These little keys are
like the keys of a miniature piano, and you supply the air required with your
left hand. May you pick out delightful music from it, my dear! For the present
-you can open your eyes now-good-bye!"
In his embarrassed way, he closed the door upon himself, and only saw, in
doing so, that she ecstatically took the present to her bosom and caressed it.
The glimpse gladdened his heart, and yet saddened it; for so might she, if her
youth had flourished in its natural course, have taken to her breast that day the
slumbering music of her own child's voice.

BARBOX BROTHERS AND CO.

With good will and earnest purpose, the gentleman for Nowhere began, on
the very next day, his researches at the heads of the seven roads. The results of
his researches, as he and Phoebe afterwards set them down in fair writing, hold
their due places in this veracious chronicle, from its seventeenth page, onward.
But they occupied a much longer time in the getting together than they ever
will in the perusal. And this is probably the case with most reading matter,
except when it is of that highly beneficial kind (for Posterity) which is
"thrown off in a few moments of leisure" by the superior poetic geniuses who
scorn to take prose pains.
It must be admitted, however, that Barbox by no means hurried himself.
His heart being in his work of good-nature, he revelled in it. There was the joy,
too (it was a true joy to him), of sometimes sitting by, listening to Phoebe as
she picked out more and more discourse from her musical instrument, and as
her natural taste and ear refined daily upon her first discoveries. Besides being
a pleasure, this was an occupation, and in the course of weeks it consumed
hours. It resulted that his dreaded birthday was close upon him before he had
troubled himself any more about it.
The matter was made more pressing by the unforeseen circumstance that
the councils held (at which Mr. Lamps, beaming most brilliantly, on a few rare
occasions assisted) respecting the road to be selected, were, after all, in no

wise assisted by his investigations. For, he had connected this interest with this
road, or that interest with the other, but could deduce no reason from it for
giving any road the preference. Consequently, when the last council was
holden, that part of the business stood, in the end, exactly where it had stood in
the beginning.
"But, sir," remarked Phoebe, "we have only six roads after all. Is the
seventh road dumb?"
"The seventh road? O!" said Barbox Brothers, rubbing his chin. "That is
the road I took, you know, when I went to get your little present. That is its
story, Phoebe."
"Would you mind taking that road again, sir?" she asked with hesitation.
"Not in the least; it is a great high road after all."
"I should like you to take it," returned Phoebe, with a persuasive smile,
"for the love of that little present which must ever be so dear to me. I should
like you to take it, because that road can never be again, like any other road to
me. I should like you to take it, in remembrance of your having done me so
much good: of your having made me so much happier! If you leave me by the
road you travelled when you went to do me this great kindness," sounding a
faint chord as she spoke, "I shall feel, lying here watching at my window, as if
it must conduct you to a prosperous end, and bring you back some day."
"It shall be done, my dear; it shall be done."
So at last the gentleman for Nowhere took a ticket for Somewhere, and his
destination was the great ingenious town.
He had loitered so long about the Junction that it was the eighteenth of
December when he left it. "High time," he reflected, as he seated himself in
the train, "that I started in earnest! Only one clear day remains between me
and the day I am running away from. I'll push onward for the hill-country tomorrow. I'll go to Wales."
It was with some pains that he placed before himself the undeniable
advantages to be gained in the way of novel occupation for his senses from
misty mountains, swollen streams, rain, cold, a wild seashore, and rugged
roads. And yet he scarcely made them out as distinctly as he could have
wished. Whether the poor girl, in spite of her new resource, her music, would
have any feeling of loneliness upon her now-just at first-that she had not
had before; whether she saw those very puffs of steam and smoke that he saw,
as he sat in the train thinking of her; whether her face would have any pensive
shadow on it as they died out of the distant view from her window; whether, in
telling him he had done her so much good, she had not unconsciously
corrected his old moody bemoaning of his station in life, by setting him
thinking that a man might be a great healer, if he would, and yet not be a great
doctor; these and other similar meditations got between him and his Welsh

picture. There was within him, too, that dull sense of vacuity which follows
separation from an object of interest, and cessation of a pleasant pursuit; and
this sense, being quite new to him, made him restless. Further, in losing
Mugby Junction he had found himself again; and he was not the more
enamoured of himself for having lately passed his time in better company.
But surely, here not far ahead, must be the great ingenious town. This
crashing and clashing that the train was undergoing, and this coupling on to it
of a multitude of new echoes, could mean nothing less than approach to the
great station. It did mean nothing less. After some stormy flashes of town
lightning, in the way of swift revelations of red-brick blocks of houses, high
red-brick chimney-shafts, vistas of red-brick railway arches, tongues of fire,
blots of smoke, valleys of canal, and hills of coal, there came the thundering in
at the journey's end.
Having seen his portmanteaus safely housed in the hotel he chose, and
having appointed his dinner-hour, Barbox Brothers went out for a walk in the
busy streets. And now it began to be suspected by him that Mugby Junction
was a Junction of many branches, invisible as well as visible, and had joined
him to an endless number of byways. For, whereas he would, but a little while
ago, have walked these streets blindly brooding, he now had eyes and thoughts
for a new external world. How the many toiling people lived, and loved, and
died; how wonderful it was to consider the various trainings of eye and hand,
the nice distinctions of sight and touch, that separated them into classes of
workers, and even into classes of workers at subdivisions of one complete
whole which combined their many intelligences and forces, though of itself
but some cheap object of use or ornament in common life; how good it was to
know that such assembling in a multitude on their part, and such contribution
of their several dexterities towards a civilising end, did not deteriorate them as
it was the fashion of the supercilious May-flies of humanity to pretend, but
engendered among them a self-respect and yet a modest desire to be much
wiser than they were (the first evinced in their well-balanced bearing and
manner of speech when he stopped to ask a question; the second, in the
announcements of their popular studies and amusements on the public walls);
these considerations, and a host of such, made his walk a memorable one. "I
too am but a little part of a great whole," he began to think; "and to be
serviceable to myself and others, or to be happy, I must cast my interest into,
and draw it out of, the common stock."
Although he had arrived at his journey's end for the day by noon, he had
since insensibly walked about the town so far and so long that the lamplighters
were now at their work in the streets, and the shops were sparkling up
brilliantly. Thus reminded to turn towards his quarters, he was in the act of
doing so, when a very little hand crept into his, and a very little voice said:
"O! If you please, I am lost."
He looked down, and saw a very little fair-haired girl.

"Yes," she said, confirming her words with a serious nod. "I am indeed. I
am lost."
Greatly perplexed, he stopped, looked about him for help, descried none,
and said, bending low: "Where do you live, my child?"
"I don't know where I live," she returned. "I am lost."
"What is your name?"
"Polly."
"What is your other name?"
The reply was prompt, but unintelligible.
Imitating the sound, as he caught it, he hazarded the guess, "Trivits?"
"O no!" said the child, shaking her head. "Nothing like that."
"Say it again, little one."
An unpromising business. For this time it had quite a different sound.
He made the venture: "Paddens?"
"O no!" said the child. "Nothing like that."
"Once more. Let us try it again, dear."
A most hopeless business. This time it swelled into four syllables. "It can't
be Tappitarver?" said Barbox Brothers, rubbing his head with his hat in
discomfiture.
"No! It ain't," the child quietly assented.
On her trying this unfortunate name once more, with extraordinary efforts
at distinctness, it swelled into eight syllables at least.
"Ah! I think," said Barbox Brothers, with a desperate air of resignation,
"that we had better give it up."
"But I am lost," said the child, nestling her little hand more closely in his,
"and you'll take care of me, won't you?"
If ever a man were disconcerted by division between compassion on the
one hand, and the very imbecility of irresolution on the other, here the man
was. "Lost!" he repeated, looking down at the child. "I am sure I am. What is
to be done!"
"Where do you live?" asked the child, looking up at him, wistfully.
"Over there," he answered, pointing vaguely in the direction of his hotel.
"Hadn't we better go there?" said the child.
"Really," he replied, "I don't know but what we had."
So they set off, hand in hand. He, through comparison of himself against
his little companion, with a clumsy feeling on him as if he had just developed

into a foolish giant. She, clearly elevated in her own tiny opinion by having
got him so neatly out of his embarrassment.
"We are going to have dinner when we get there, I suppose?" said Polly.
"Well," he rejoined, "I-yes, I suppose we are."
"Do you like your dinner?" asked the child.
"Why, on the whole," said Barbox Brothers, "yes, I think I do."
"I do mine," said Polly. "Have you any brothers and sisters?"
"No. Have you?"
"Mine are dead."
"Oh!" said Barbox Brothers. With that absurd sense of unwieldiness of
mind and body weighing him down, he would have not known how to pursue
the conversation beyond this curt rejoinder, but that the child was always
ready for him.
"What," she asked, turning her soft hand coaxingly in his, "are you going
to do to amuse me, after dinner?"
"Upon my soul, Polly," exclaimed Barbox Brothers, very much at a loss, "I
have not the slightest idea!"
"Then I tell you what," said Polly. "Have you got any cards at your
house?"
"Plenty," said Barbox Brothers, in a boastful vein.
"Very well. Then I'll build houses, and you shall look at me. You mustn't
blow, you know."
"O no!" said Barbox Brothers. "No, no, no. No blowing. Blowing's not
fair."
He flattered himself that he had said this pretty well for an idiotic Monster;
but the child, instantly perceiving the awkwardness of his attempt to adapt
himself to her level, utterly destroyed his hopeful opinion of himself by
saying, compassionately: "What a funny man you are!"
Feeling, after this melancholy failure, as if he every minute grew bigger
and heavier in person, and weaker in mind, Barbox gave himself up for a bad
job. No giant ever submitted more meekly to be led in triumph by allconquering Jack, than he to be bound in slavery to Polly.
"Do you know any stories?" she asked him.
He was reduced to the humiliating confession: "No."
"What a dunce you must be, mustn't you?" said Polly.
He was reduced to the humiliating confession: "Yes."
"Would you like me to teach you a story? But you must remember it, you

know, and be able to tell it right to somebody else afterwards."
He professed that it would afford him the highest mental gratification to be
taught a story, and that he would humbly endeavour to retain it in his mind.
Whereupon Polly, giving her hand a new little turn in his, expressive of
settling down for enjoyment, commenced a long romance, of which every
relishing clause began with the words: "So this" or "And so this." As, "So this
boy;" or, "So this fairy;" or, "And so this pie was four yards round, and two
yards and a quarter deep." The interest of the romance was derived from the
intervention of this fairy to punish this boy for having a greedy appetite. To
achieve which purpose, this fairy made this pie, and this boy ate and ate and
ate, and his cheeks swelled and swelled and swelled. There were many
tributary circumstances, but the forcible interest culminated in the total
consumption of this pie, and the bursting of this boy. Truly he was a fine sight,
Barbox Brothers, with serious attentive face, and ear bent down, much jostled
on the pavements of the busy town, but afraid of losing a single incident of the
epic, lest he should be examined in it by-and-by and found deficient.
Thus they arrived at the hotel. And there he had to say at the bar, and said
awkwardly enough: "I have found a little girl!"
The whole establishment turned out to look at the little girl. Nobody knew
her; nobody could make out her name, as she set it forth-except one
chambermaid, who said it was Constantinople-which it wasn't.
"I will dine with my young friend in a private room," said Barbox Brothers
to the hotel authorities, "and perhaps you will be so good as let the police
know that the pretty baby is here. I suppose she is sure to be inquired for,
soon, if she has not been already. Come along, Polly."
Perfectly at ease and peace, Polly came along, but, finding the stairs rather
stiff work, was carried up by Barbox Brothers. The dinner was a most
transcendent success, and the Barbox sheepishness, under Polly's directions
how to mince her meat for her, and how to diffuse gravy over the plate with a
liberal and equal hand, was another fine sight.
"And now," said Polly, "while we are at dinner, you be good, and tell me
that story I taught you."
With the tremors of a civil service examination on him, and very uncertain
indeed, not only as to the epoch at which the pie appeared in history, but also
as to the measurements of that indispensable fact, Barbox Brothers made a
shaky beginning, but under encouragement did very fairly. There was a want
of breadth observable in his rendering of the cheeks, as well as the appetite, of
the boy; and there was a certain tameness in his fairy, referable to an undercurrent of desire to account for her. Still, as the first lumbering performance of
a good-humoured monster, it passed muster.
"I told you to be good," said Polly, "and you are good, ain't you?"

"I hope so," replied Barbox Brothers.
Such was his deference that Polly, elevated on a platform of sofa-cushions
in a chair at his right hand, encouraged him with a pat or two on the face from
the greasy bowl of her spoon, and even with a gracious kiss. In getting on her
feet upon her chair, however, to give him this last reward, she toppled forward
among the dishes, and caused him to exclaim as he effected her rescue:
"Gracious Angels! Whew! I thought we were in the fire, Polly!"
"What a coward you are, ain't you?" said Polly, when replaced.
"Yes, I am rather nervous," he replied. "Whew! Don't, Polly! Don't
flourish your spoon, or you'll go over sideways. Don't tilt up your legs when
you laugh, Polly, or you'll go over backwards. Whew! Polly, Polly, Polly,"
said Barbox Brothers, nearly succumbing to despair, "we are environed with
dangers!"
Indeed, he could descry no security from the pitfalls that were yawning for
Polly, but in proposing to her, after dinner, to sit upon a low stool. "I will, if
you will," said Polly. So, as peace of mind should go before all, he begged the
waiter to wheel aside the table, bring a pack of cards, a couple of footstools,
and a screen, and close in Polly and himself before the fire, as it were in a
snug room within the room. Then, finest sight of all, was Barbox Brothers on
his footstool, with a pint decanter on the rug, contemplating Polly as she built
successfully, and growing blue in the face with holding his breath, lest he
should blow the house down.
"How you stare, don't you?" said Polly, in a houseless pause.
Detected in the ignoble fact, he felt obliged to admit, apologetically: "I am
afraid I was looking rather hard at you, Polly."
"Why do you stare?" asked Polly.
"I cannot," he murmured to himself, "recall why.-I don't know, Polly."
"You must be a simpleton to do things and not know why, mustn't you?"
said Polly.
In spite of which reproof, he looked at the child again, intently, as she bent
her head over her card-structure, her rich curls shading her face. "It is
impossible," he thought, "that I can ever have seen this pretty baby before.
Can I have dreamed of her? In some sorrowful dream?"
He could make nothing of it. So he went into the building trade as a
journeyman under Polly, and they built three stories high, four stories high:
even five.
"I say. Who do you think is coming?" asked Polly, rubbing her eyes after
tea.
He guessed: "The waiter?"

"No," said Polly, "the dustman. I am getting sleepy."
A new embarrassment for Barbox Brothers!
"I don't think I am going to be fetched to-night," said Polly; "what do you
think?"
He thought not, either. After another quarter of an hour, the dustman not
merely impending but actually arriving, recourse was had to the
Constantinopolitan chambermaid: who cheerily undertook that the child
should sleep in a comfortable and wholesome room, which she herself would
share.
"And I know you will be careful, won't you," said Barbox Brothers, as a
new fear dawned upon him, "that she don't fall out of bed."
Polly found this so highly entertaining that she was under the necessity of
clutching him round the neck with both arms as he sat on his footstool picking
up the cards, and rocking him to and fro, with her dimpled chin on his
shoulder.
"O what a coward you are, ain't you!" said Polly. "Do you fall out of bed?"
"N-not generally, Polly."
"No more do I."
With that, Polly gave him a reassuring hug or two to keep him going, and
then giving that confiding mite of a hand of hers to be swallowed up in the
hand of the Constantinopolitan chambermaid, trotted off, chattering, without a
vestige of anxiety.
He looked after her, had the screen removed and the table and chairs
replaced, and still looked after her. He paced the room for half an hour. "A
most engaging little creature, but it's not that. A most winning little voice, but
it's not that. That has much to do with it, but there is something more. How
can it be that I seem to know this child? What was it she imperfectly recalled
to me when I felt her touch in the street, and, looking down at her, saw her
looking up at me?"
"Mr. Jackson!"
With a start he turned towards the sound of the subdued voice, and saw his
answer standing at the door.
"O Mr. Jackson, do not be severe with me. Speak a word of
encouragement to me, I beseech you."
"You are Polly's mother."
"Yes."
Yes. Polly herself might come to this, one day. As you see what the rose
was, in its faded leaves; as you see what the summer growth of the woods was,
in their wintry branches; so Polly might be traced, one day, in a care-worn

woman like this, with her hair turned grey. Before him, were the ashes of a
dead fire that had once burned bright. This was the woman he had loved. This
was the woman he had lost. Such had been the constancy of his imagination to
her, so had Time spared her under its withholding, that now, seeing how
roughly the inexorable hand had struck her, his soul was filled with pity and
amazement.
He led her to a chair, and stood leaning on a corner of the chimney-piece,
with his head resting on his hand, and his face half averted.
"Did you see me in the street, and show me to your child?" he asked.
"Yes."
"Is the little creature, then, a party to deceit?"
"I hope there is no deceit. I said to her, 'We have lost our way, and I must
try to find mine by myself. Go to that gentleman and tell him you are lost. You
shall be fetched by-and-by.' Perhaps you have not thought how very young she
is?"
"She is very self-reliant."
"Perhaps because she is so young?"
He asked, after a short pause, "Why did you do this?"
"O Mr. Jackson, do you ask me? In the hope that you might see something
in my innocent child to soften your heart towards me. Not only towards me,
but towards my husband."
He suddenly turned about, and walked to the opposite end of the room. He
came back again with a slower step, and resumed his former attitude, saying:
"I thought you had emigrated to America?"
"We did. But life went ill with us there, and we came back."
"Do you live in this town?"
"Yes. I am a daily teacher of music here. My husband is a book-keeper."
"Are you-forgive my asking-poor?"
"We earn enough for our wants. That is not our distress. My husband is
very, very ill of a lingering disorder. He will never recover-"
"You check yourself. If it is for want of the encouraging word you spoke
of, take it from me. I cannot forget the old time, Beatrice."
"God bless you!" she replied, with a burst of tears, and gave him her
trembling hand.
"Compose yourself. I cannot be composed if you are not, for to see you
weep distresses me beyond expression. Speak freely to me. Trust me."
She shaded her face with her veil, and after a little while spoke calmly. Her

voice had the ring of Polly's.
"It is not that my husband's mind is at all impaired by his bodily suffering,
for I assure you that is not the case. But in his weakness, and in his knowledge
that he is incurably ill, he cannot overcome the ascendancy of one idea. It
preys upon him, embitters every moment of his painful life, and will shorten
it."
She stopping, he said again: "Speak freely to me. Trust me."
"We have had five children before this darling, and they all lie in their little
graves. He believes that they have withered away under a curse, and that it
will blight this child like the rest."
"Under what curse?"
"Both I and he have it on our conscience that we tried you very heavily,
and I do not know but that, if I were as ill as he, I might suffer in my mind as
he does. This is the constant burden:-'I believe, Beatrice, I was the only
friend that Mr. Jackson ever cared to make, though I was so much his junior.
The more influence he acquired in the business, the higher he advanced me,
and I was alone in his private confidence. I came between him and you, and I
took you from him. We were both secret, and the blow fell when he was
wholly unprepared. The anguish it caused a man so compressed, must have
been terrible; the wrath it awakened, inappeasable. So, a curse came to be
invoked on our poor pretty little flowers, and they fall.'"
"And you, Beatrice," he asked, when she had ceased to speak, and there
had been a silence afterwards: "how say you?"
"Until within these few weeks I was afraid of you, and I believed that you
would never, never, forgive."
"Until within these few weeks," he repeated. "Have you changed your
opinion of me within these few weeks?"
"Yes."
"For what reason?"
"I was getting some pieces of music in a shop in this town, when, to my
terror, you came in. As I veiled my face and stood in the dark end of the shop,
I heard you explain that you wanted a musical instrument for a bedridden girl.
Your voice and manner were so softened, you showed such interest in its
selection, you took it away yourself with so much tenderness of care and
pleasure, that I knew you were a man with a most gentle heart. O Mr. Jackson,
Mr. Jackson, if you could have felt the refreshing rain of tears that followed
for me!"
Was Phoebe playing at that moment, on her distant couch? He seemed to
hear her.
"I inquired in the shop where you lived, but could get no information. As I

had heard you say that you were going back by the next train (but you did not
say where), I resolved to visit the station at about that time of day, as often as I
could, between my lessons, on the chance of seeing you again. I have been
there very often, but saw you no more until to-day. You were meditating as
you walked the street, but the calm expression of your face emboldened me to
send my child to you. And when I saw you bend your head to speak tenderly
to her, I prayed to God to forgive me for having ever brought a sorrow on it. I
now pray to you to forgive me, and to forgive my husband. I was very young,
he was young too, and in the ignorant hardihood of such a time of life we
don't know what we do to those who have undergone more discipline. You
generous man! You good man! So to raise me up and make nothing of my
crime against you!"-for he would not see her on her knees, and soothed her
as a kind father might have soothed an erring daughter-"thank you, bless
you, thank you!"
When he next spoke, it was after having drawn aside the window-curtain
and looked out a while. Then, he only said:
"Is Polly asleep?"
"Yes. As I came in, I met her going away up-stairs, and put her to bed
myself."
"Leave her with me for to-morrow, Beatrice, and write me your address on
this leaf of my pocket-book. In the evening I will bring her home to you-and
to her father."
"Hallo!" cried Polly, putting her saucy sunny face in at the door next
morning when breakfast was ready: "I thought I was fetched last night?"
"So you were, Polly, but I asked leave to keep you here for the day, and to
take you home in the evening."
"Upon my word!" said Polly. "You are very cool, ain't you?"
However, Polly seemed to think it a good idea, and added, "I suppose I
must give you a kiss, though you are cool." The kiss given and taken, they sat
down to breakfast in a highly conversational tone.
"Of course, you are going to amuse me?" said Polly.
"Oh, of course," said Barbox Brothers.
In the pleasurable height of her anticipations, Polly found it indispensable
to put down her piece of toast, cross one of her little fat knees over the other,
and bring her little fat right hand down into her left hand with a business-like
slap. After this gathering of herself together, Polly, by that time, a mere heap
of dimples, asked in a wheedling manner: "What are we going to do, you dear
old thing?"
"Why, I was thinking," said Barbox Brothers, "-but are you fond of
horses, Polly?"

"Ponies, I am," said Polly, "especially when their tails are long. But horses
-n-no-too big, you know."
"Well," pursued Barbox Brothers, in a spirit of grave mysterious
confidence adapted to the importance of the consultation, "I did see yesterday,
Polly, on the walls, pictures of two long-tailed ponies, speckled all over-"
"No, no, no!" cried Polly, in an ecstatic desire to linger on the charming
details. "Not speckled all over!"
"Speckled all over. Which ponies jump through hoops-"
"No, no, no!" cried Polly, as before. "They never jump through hoops!"
"Yes, they do. O I assure you, they do. And eat pie in pinafores-"
"Ponies eating pie in pinafores!" said Polly. "What a story-teller you are,
ain't you?"
"Upon my honour.-And fire off guns."
(Polly hardly seemed to see the force of the ponies resorting to fire-arms.)
"And I was thinking," pursued the exemplary Barbox, "that if you and I
were to go to the Circus where these ponies are, it would do our constitutions
good."
"Does that mean, amuse us?" inquired Polly. "What long words you do
use, don't you?"
Apologetic for having wandered out of his depth, he replied: "That means,
amuse us. That is exactly what it means. There are many other wonders
besides the ponies, and we shall see them all. Ladies and gentlemen in
spangled dresses, and elephants and lions and tigers."
Polly became observant of the teapot, with a curled-up nose indicating
some uneasiness of mind. "They never get out, of course," she remarked as a
mere truism.
"The elephants and lions and tigers? O dear no!"
"O dear no!" said Polly. "And of course nobody's afraid of the ponies
shooting anybody."
"Not the least in the world."
"No, no, not the least in the world," said Polly.
"I was also thinking," proceeded Barbox, "that if we were to look in at the
toy-shop, to choose a doll-"
"Not dressed!" cried Polly, with a clap of her hands. "No, no, no, not
dressed!"
"Full dressed. Together with a house, and all things necessary for
housekeeping-"

Polly gave a little scream, and seemed in danger of falling into a swoon of
bliss. "What a darling you are!" she languidly exclaimed, leaning back in her
chair. "Come and be hugged, or I must come and hug you!"
This resplendent programme was carried into execution with the utmost
rigour of the law. It being essential to make the purchase of the doll its first
feature-or that lady would have lost the ponies-the toy-shop expedition
took precedence. Polly in the magic warehouse, with a doll as large as herself
under each arm, and a neat assortment of some twenty more on view upon the
counter, did indeed present a spectacle of indecision not quite compatible with
unalloyed happiness, but the light cloud passed. The lovely specimen oftenest
chosen, oftenest rejected, and finally abided by, was of Circassian descent,
possessing as much boldness of beauty as was reconcilable with extreme
feebleness of mouth, and combining a sky-blue silk pelisse with rose-coloured
satin trousers, and a black velvet hat: which this fair stranger to our northern
shores would seem to have founded on the portraits of the late Duchess of
Kent. The name this distinguished foreigner brought with her from beneath the
glowing skies of a sunny clime was (on Polly's authority) Miss Melluka, and
the costly nature of her outfit as a housekeeper, from the Barbox coffers, may
be inferred from the two facts that her silver teaspoons were as large as her
kitchen poker, and that the proportions of her watch exceeded those of her
frying-pan. Miss Melluka was graciously pleased to express her entire
approbation of the Circus, and so was Polly; for the ponies were speckled, and
brought down nobody when they fired, and the savagery of the wild beasts
appeared to be mere smoke-which article, in fact, they did produce in large
quantities from their insides. The Barbox absorption in the general subject
throughout the realisation of these delights was again a sight to see, nor was it
less worthy to behold at dinner, when he drank to Miss Melluka, tied stiff in a
chair opposite to Polly (the fair Circassian possessing an unbendable spine),
and even induced the waiter to assist in carrying out with due decorum the
prevailing glorious idea. To wind up, there came the agreeable fever of getting
Miss Melluka and all her wardrobe and rich possessions into a fly with Polly,
to be taken home. But by that time Polly had become unable to look upon such
accumulated joys with waking eyes, and had withdrawn her consciousness
into the wonderful Paradise of a child's sleep. "Sleep, Polly, sleep," said
Barbox Brothers, as her head dropped on his shoulder; "you shall not fall out
of this bed, easily, at any rate!"
What rustling piece of paper he took from his pocket, and carefully folded
into the bosom of Polly's frock, shall not be mentioned. He said nothing about
it, and nothing shall be said about it. They drove to a modest suburb of the
great ingenious town, and stopped at the forecourt of a small house. "Do not
wake the child," said Barbox Brothers, softly, to the driver, "I will carry her in
as she is."
Greeting the light at the opened door which was held by Polly's mother,

Polly's bearer passed on with mother and child into a ground-floor room.
There, stretched on a sofa, lay a sick man, sorely wasted, who covered his eyes
with his emaciated hands.
"Tresham," said Barbox, in a kindly voice, "I have brought you back your
Polly, fast asleep. Give me your hand, and tell me you are better."
The sick man reached forth his right hand, and bowed his head over the
hand into which it was taken and kissed it. "Thank you, thank you! I may say
that I am well and happy."
"That's brave," said Barbox. "Tresham, I have a fancy-can you make
room for me beside you here?"
He sat down on the sofa as he said words, cherishing the plump peachy
cheek that lay uppermost on his shoulder.
"I have a fancy, Tresham (I am getting quite an old fellow now, you know,
and old fellows may take fancies into their heads sometimes), to give up Polly,
having found her, to no one but you. Will you take her from me?"
As the father held out his arms for the child, each of the two men looked
steadily at the other.
"She is very dear to you, Tresham?"
"Unutterably dear."
"God bless her! It is not much, Polly," he continued, turning his eyes upon
her peaceful face as he apostrophised her, "it is not much, Polly, for a blind
and sinful man to invoke a blessing on something so far better than himself as
a little child is; but it would be much-much upon his cruel head, and much
upon his guilty soul-if he could be so wicked as to invoke a curse. He had
better have a millstone round his neck, and be cast into the deepest sea. Live
and thrive, my pretty baby!" Here he kissed her. "Live and prosper, and
become in time the mother of other little children, like the Angels who behold
The Father's face!"
He kissed her again, gave her up gently to both her parents, and went out.
But he went not to Wales. No, he never went to Wales. He went
straightway for another stroll about the town, and he looked in upon the people
at their work, and at their play, here, there, everywhere, and where not. For he
was Barbox Brothers and Co. now, and had taken thousands of partners into
the solitary firm.
He had at length got back to his hotel room, and was standing before his
fire refreshing himself with a glass of hot drink which he had stood upon the
chimney-piece, when he heard the town clocks striking, and, referring to his
watch, found the evening to have so slipped away, that they were striking
twelve. As he put up his watch again, his eyes met those of his reflection in the
chimney-glass.

"Why it's your birthday already," he said, smiling. "You are looking very
well. I wish you many happy returns of the day."
He had never before bestowed that wish upon himself. "By Jupiter!" he
discovered, "it alters the whole case of running away from one's birthday! It's
a thing to explain to Phoebe. Besides, here is quite a long story to tell her, that
has sprung out of the road with no story. I'll go back, instead of going on. I'll
go back by my friend Lamps's Up X presently."
He went back to Mugby Junction, and in point of fact he established
himself at Mugby Junction. It was the convenient place to live in, for
brightening Phoebe's life. It was the convenient place to live in, for having her
taught music by Beatrice. It was the convenient place to live in, for
occasionally borrowing Polly. It was the convenient place to live in, for being
joined at will to all sorts of agreeable places and persons. So, he became
settled there, and, his house standing in an elevated situation, it is noteworthy
of him in conclusion, as Polly herself might (not irreverently) have put it:
There was an Old Barbox who lived on a hill,
And if he ain't gone, he lives there still.
Here follows the substance of what was seen, heard, or otherwise picked
up, by the Gentleman for Nowhere, in his careful study of the Junction.

MAIN LINE
THE BOY AT MUGBY

I am The Boy at Mugby. That's about what I am.
You don't know what I mean? What a pity! But I think you do. I think you
must. Look here. I am the Boy at what is called The Refreshment Room at
Mugby Junction, and what's proudest boast is, that it never yet refreshed a
mortal being.
Up in a corner of the Down Refreshment Room at Mugby Junction, in the
height of twenty-seven cross draughts (I've often counted 'em while they
brush the First Class hair twenty-seven ways), behind the bottles, among the
glasses, bounded on the nor'-west by the beer, stood pretty far to the right of a
metallic object that's at times the tea-urn and at times the soup-tureen,

according to the nature of the last twang imparted to its contents which are the
same groundwork, fended off from the traveller by a barrier of stale spongecakes erected atop of the counter, and lastly exposed sideways to the glare of
our Missis's eye-you ask a Boy so sitiwated, next time you stop in a hurry at
Mugby, for anything to drink; you take particular notice that he'll try to seem
not to hear you, that he'll appear in a absent manner to survey the Line
through a transparent medium composed of your head and body, and that he
won't serve you as long as you can possibly bear it. That's Me.
What a lark it is! We are the Model Establishment, we are, at Mugby.
Other Refreshment Rooms send their imperfect young ladies up to be finished
off by our Missis. For some of the young ladies, when they're new to the
business, come into it mild! Ah! Our Missis, she soon takes that out of 'em.
Why, I originally come into the business meek myself. But Our Missis she
soon took that out of me.
What a delightful lark it is! I look upon us Refreshmenters as ockipying
the only proudly independent footing on the Line. There's Papers for instance
-my honourable friend if he will allow me to call him so-him as belongs to
Smith's bookstall. Why he no more dares to be up to our Refreshmenting
games, than he dares to jump atop of a locomotive with her steam at full
pressure, and cut away upon her alone, driving himself, at limited-mail speed.
Papers, he'd get his head punched at every compartment, first, second and
third, the whole length of a train, if he was to ventur to imitate my demeanour.
It's the same with the porters, the same with the guards, the same with the
ticket clerks, the same the whole way up to the secretary, traffic manager, or
very chairman. There ain't a one among 'em on the nobly independent footing
we are. Did you ever catch one of them, when you wanted anything of him,
making a system of surveying the Line through a transparent medium
composed of your head and body? I should hope not.
You should see our Bandolining Room at Mugby Junction. It's led to, by
the door behind the counter which you'll notice usually stands ajar, and it's the
room where Our Missis and our young ladies Bandolines their hair. You
should see 'em at it, betwixt trains, Bandolining away, as if they was anointing
themselves for the combat. When you're telegraphed, you should see their
noses all a going up with scorn, as if it was a part of the working of the same
Cooke and Wheatstone electrical machinery. You should hear Our Missis give
the word "Here comes the Beast to be Fed!" and then you should see 'em
indignantly skipping across the Line, from the Up to the Down, or Wicer
Warsaw, and begin to pitch the stale pastry into the plates, and chuck the
sawdust sangwiches under the glass covers, and get out the-ha ha ha!-the
Sherry-O my eye, my eye!-for your Refreshment.
It's only in the Isle of the Brave and Land of the Free (by which of course I
mean to say Britannia) that Refreshmenting is so effective, so 'olesome, so
constitutional, a check upon the public. There was a foreigner, which having

politely, with his hat off, beseeched our young ladies and Our Missis for "a
leetel gloss hoff prarndee," and having had the Line surveyed through him by
all and no other acknowledgment, was a proceeding at last to help himself, as
seems to be the custom in his own country, when Our Missis with her hair
almost a coming un-Bandolined with rage, and her eyes omitting sparks, flew
at him, cotched the decanter out of his hand, and said: "Put it down! I won't
allow that!" The foreigner turned pale, stepped back with his arms stretched
out in front of him, his hands clasped, and his shoulders riz, and exclaimed:
"Ah! Is it possible this! That these disdaineous females and this ferocious old
woman are placed here by the administration, not only to empoison the
voyagers, but to affront them! Great Heaven! How arrives it? The English
people. Or is he then a slave? Or idiot?" Another time, a merry wideawake
American gent had tried the sawdust and spit it out, and had tried the Sherry
and spit that out, and had tried in vain to sustain exhausted natur upon ButterScotch, and had been rather extra Bandolined and Line-surveyed through,
when, as the bell was ringing and he paid Our Missis, he says, very loud and
good-tempered: "I tell Yew what 'tis, ma'arm. I la'af. Theer! I la'af. I Dew. I
oughter ha' seen most things, for I hail from the Onlimited side of the Atlantic
Ocean, and I haive travelled right slick over the Limited, head on through Jeerusalemm and the East, and likeways France and Italy, Europe Old World, and
am now upon the track to the Chief Europian Village; but such an Institution
as Yew, and Yewer young ladies, and Yewer fixin's solid and liquid, afore the
glorious Tarnal I never did see yet! And if I hain't found the eighth wonder of
monarchical Creation, in finding Yew, and Yewer young ladies, and Yewer
fixin's solid and liquid, all as aforesaid, established in a country where the
people air not absolute Loo-naticks, I am Extra Double Darned with a Nip and
Frizzle to the innermostest grit! Wheerfur-Theer!-I la'af! I Dew, ma'arm. I
la'af!" And so he went, stamping and shaking his sides, along the platform all
the way to his own compartment.
I think it was her standing up agin the Foreigner, as giv' Our Missis the
idea of going over to France, and droring a comparison betwixt
Refreshmenting as followed among the frog-eaters, and Refreshmenting as
triumphant in the Isle of the Brave and Land of the Free (by which of course I
mean to say agin, Britannia). Our young ladies, Miss Whiff, Miss Piff, and
Mrs. Sniff, was unanimous opposed to her going; for, as they says to Our
Missis one and all, it is well beknown to the hends of the herth as no other
nation except Britain has a idea of anythink, but above all of business. Why
then should you tire yourself to prove what is aready proved? Our Missis
however (being a teazer at all pints) stood out grim obstinate, and got a return
pass by South-Eastern Tidal, to go right through, if such should be her
dispositions, to Marseilles.
Sniff is husband to Mrs. Sniff, and is a regular insignificant cove. He looks
arter the sawdust department in a back room, and is sometimes when we are
very hard put to it let in behind the counter with a corkscrew; but never when

it can be helped, his demeanour towards the public being disgusting servile.
How Mrs. Sniff ever come so far to lower herself as to marry him, I don't
know; but I suppose he does, and I should think he wished he didn't, for he
leads a awful life. Mrs. Sniff couldn't be much harder with him if he was
public. Similarly, Miss Whiff and Miss Piff; taking the tone of Mrs. Sniff, they
shoulder Sniff about when he is let in with a corkscrew, and they whisk things
out of his hands when in his servility he is a going to let the public have 'em,
and they snap him up when in the crawling baseness of his spirit he is a going
to answer a public question, and they drore more tears into his eyes than ever
the mustard does which he all day long lays on to the sawdust. (But it ain't
strong.) Once, when Sniff had the repulsiveness to reach across to get the
milk-pot to hand over for a baby, I see Our Missis in her rage catch him by
both his shoulders and spin him out into the Bandolining Room.
But Mrs. Sniff. How different! She's the one! She's the one as you'll
notice to be always looking another way from you, when you look at her.
She's the one with the small waist buckled in tight in front, and with the lace
cuffs at her wrists, which she puts on the edge of the counter before her, and
stands a smoothing while the public foams. This smoothing the cuffs and
looking another way while the public foams, is the last accomplishment taught
to the young ladies as come to Mugby to be finished by Our Missis; and it's
always taught by Mrs. Sniff.
When Our Missis went away upon her journey, Mrs. Sniff was left in
charge. She did hold the public in check most beautiful! In all my time, I never
see half so many cups of tea given without milk to people as wanted it with,
nor half so many cups of tea with milk given to people as wanted it without.
When foaming ensued, Mrs. Sniff would say: "Then you'd better settle it
among yourselves, and change with one another." It was a most highly
delicious lark. I enjoyed the Refreshmenting business more than ever, and was
so glad I had took to it when young.
Our Missis returned. It got circulated among the young ladies, and it as it
might be penetrated to me through the crevices of the Bandolining Room, that
she had Orrors to reveal, if revelations so contemptible could be dignified with
the name. Agitation become awakened. Excitement was up in the stirrups.
Expectation stood a tiptoe. At length it was put forth that on our slackest
evening in the week, and at our slackest time of that evening betwixt trains,
Our Missis would give her views of foreign Refreshmenting, in the
Bandolining Room.
It was arranged tasteful for the purpose. The Bandolining table and glass
was hid in a corner, a arm-chair was elevated on a packing-case for Our
Missis's ockypation, a table and a tumbler of water (no sherry in it, thankee)
was placed beside it. Two of the pupils, the season being autumn, and
hollyhocks and daliahs being in, ornamented the wall with three devices in
those flowers. On one might be read, "May Albion never Learn;" on another,

"Keep the Public Down;" on another, "Our Refreshmenting Charter." The
whole had a beautiful appearance, with which the beauty of the sentiments
corresponded.
On Our Missis's brow was wrote Severity, as she ascended the fatal
platform. (Not that that was anythink new.) Miss Whiff and Miss Piff sat at her
feet. Three chairs from the Waiting Room might have been perceived by a
average eye, in front of her, on which the pupils was accommodated. Behind
them, a very close observer might have discerned a Boy. Myself.
"Where," said Our Missis, glancing gloomily around, "is Sniff?"
"I thought it better," answered Mrs. Sniff, "that he should not be let to
come in. He is such an Ass."
"No doubt," assented Our Missis. "But for that reason is it not desirable to
improve his mind?"
"O! Nothing will ever improve him," said Mrs. Sniff.
"However," pursued Our Missis, "call him in, Ezekiel."
I called him in. The appearance of the low-minded cove was hailed with
disapprobation from all sides, on account of his having brought his corkscrew
with him. He pleaded "the force of habit."
"The force!" said Mrs. Sniff. "Don't let us have you talking about force,
for Gracious sake. There! Do stand still where you are, with your back against
the wall."
He is a smiling piece of vacancy, and he smiled in the mean way in which
he will even smile at the public if he gets a chance (language can say no
meaner of him), and he stood upright near the door with the back of his head
agin the wall, as if he was a waiting for somebody to come and measure his
heighth for the Army.
"I should not enter, ladies," says Our Missis, "on the revolting disclosures
I am about to make, if it was not in the hope that they will cause you to be yet
more implacable in the exercise of the power you wield in a constitutional
country, and yet more devoted to the constitutional motto which I see before
me;" it was behind her, but the words sounded better so; "'May Albion never
learn!'"
Here the pupils as had made the motto, admired it, and cried, "Hear! Hear!
Hear!" Sniff, showing an inclination to join in chorus, got himself frowned
down by every brow.
"The baseness of the French," pursued Our Missis, "as displayed in the
fawning nature of their Refreshmenting, equals, if not surpasses, anythink as
was ever heard of the baseness of the celebrated Buonaparte."
Miss Whiff, Miss Piff and me, we drored a heavy breath, equal to saying,
"We thought as much!"

Miss Whiff and Miss Piff seeming to object to my droring mine along with
theirs, I drored another, to aggravate 'em.
"Shall I be believed," says Our Missis, with flashing eyes, "when I tell you
that no sooner had I set my foot upon that treacherous shore-"
Here Sniff, either busting out mad, or thinking aloud, says, in a low voice:
"Feet. Plural, you know."
The cowering that come upon him when he was spurned by all eyes, added
to his being beneath contempt, was sufficient punishment for a cove so
grovelling. In the midst of a silence rendered more impressive by the turnedup female noses with which it was pervaded, Our Missis went on:
"Shall I be believed when I tell you that no sooner had I landed," this word
with a killing look at Sniff, "on that treacherous shore, than I was ushered into
a Refreshment Room where there were, I do not exaggerate, actually eatable
things to eat?"
A groan burst from the ladies. I not only did myself the honour of jining,
but also of lengthening it out.
"Where there were," Our Missis added, "not only eatable things to eat, but
also drinkable things to drink?"
A murmur, swelling almost into a scream, ariz. Miss Piff, trembling with
indignation, called out: "Name!"
"I will name," said Our Missis. "There was roast fowls, hot and cold; there
was smoking roast veal surrounded with browned potatoes; there was hot soup
with (again I ask shall I be credited?) nothing bitter in it, and no flour to choke
off the consumer; there was a variety of cold dishes set off with jelly; there
was salad; there was-mark me!-fresh pastry, and that of a light
construction; there was a luscious show of fruit. There was bottles and
decanters of sound small wine, of every size and adapted to every pocket; the
same odious statement will apply to brandy; and these were set out upon the
counter so that all could help themselves."
Our Missis's lips so quivered, that Mrs. Sniff, though scarcely less
convulsed than she were, got up and held the tumbler to them.
"This," proceeds Our Missis, "was my first unconstitutional experience.
Well would it have been, if it had been my last and worst. But no. As I
proceeded further into that enslaved and ignorant land, its aspect became more
hideous. I need not explain to this assembly, the ingredients and formation of
the British Refreshment sangwich?"
Universal laughter-except from Sniff, who, as sangwich-cutter, shook his
head in a state of the utmost dejection as he stood with it agin the wall.
"Well!" said Our Missis, with dilated nostrils. "Take a fresh crisp long
crusty penny loaf made of the whitest and best flower. Cut it longwise through

the middle. Insert a fair and nicely fitting slice of ham. Tie a smart piece of
ribbon round the middle of the whole to bind it together. Add at one end a neat
wrapper of clean white paper by which to hold it. And the universal French
Refreshment sangwich busts on your disgusted vision."
A cry of "Shame!" from all-except Sniff, which rubbed his stomach with
a soothing hand.
"I need not," said Our Missis, "explain to this assembly, the usual
formation and fitting of the British Refreshment Room?"
No, no, and laughter. Sniff agin shaking his head in low spirits agin the
wall.
"Well," said Our Missis, "what would you say to a general decoration of
everythink, to hangings (sometimes elegant), to easy velvet furniture, to
abundance of little tables, to abundance of little seats, to brisk bright waiters,
to great convenience, to a pervading cleanliness and tastefulness positively
addressing the public and making the Beast thinking itself worth the pains?"
Contemptuous fury on the part of all the ladies. Mrs. Sniff looking as if she
wanted somebody to hold her, and everybody else looking as if they'd rayther
not.
"Three times," said our Missis, working herself into a truly terrimenjious
state, "three times did I see these shamful things, only between the coast and
Paris, and not counting either: at Hazebroucke, at Arras, at Amiens. But worse
remains. Tell me, what would you call a person who should propose in
England that there should be kept, say at our own model Mugby Junction,
pretty baskets, each holding an assorted cold lunch and dessert for one, each at
a certain fixed price, and each within a passenger's power to take away, to
empty in the carriage at perfect leisure, and to return at another station fifty or
a hundred miles further on?"
There was disagreement what such a person should be called. Whether
revolutionist, atheist, Bright (I said him), or Un-English. Miss Piff screeched
her shrill opinion last, in the words: "A malignant maniac!"
"I adopt," says Our Missis, "the brand set upon such a person by the
righteous indignation of my friend Miss Piff. A malignant maniac. Know then,
that that malignant maniac has sprung from the congenial soil of France, and
that his malignant madness was in unchecked action on this same part of my
journey."
I noticed that Sniff was a rubbing his hands, and that Mrs. Sniff had got
her eye upon him. But I did not take more particular notice, owing to the
excited state in which the young ladies was, and to feeling myself called upon
to keep it up with a howl.
"On my experience south of Paris," said Our Missis, in a deep tone, "I will
not expatiate. Too loathsome were the task! But fancy this. Fancy a guard

coming round, with the train at full speed, to inquire how many for dinner.
Fancy his telegraphing forward, the number of diners. Fancy every one
expected, and the table elegantly laid for the complete party. Fancy a charming
dinner, in a charming room, and the head-cook, concerned for the honour of
every dish, superintending in his clean white jacket and cap. Fancy the Beast
travelling six hundred miles on end, very fast, and with great punctuality, yet
being taught to expect all this to be done for it!"
A spirited chorus of "The Beast!"
I noticed that Sniff was agin a rubbing his stomach with a soothing hand,
and that he had drored up one leg. But agin I didn't take particular notice,
looking on myself as called upon to stimilate public feeling. It being a lark
besides.
"Putting everything together," said Our Missis, "French Refreshmenting
comes to this, and O it comes to a nice total! First: eatable things to eat, and
drinkable things to drink."
A groan from the young ladies, kep' up by me.
"Second: convenience, and even elegance."
Another groan from the young ladies, kep' up by me.
"Third: moderate charges."
This time, a groan from me, kep' up by the young ladies.
"Fourth:-and here," says Our Missis, "I claim your angriest sympathy-
attention, common civility, nay, even politeness!"
Me and the young ladies regularly raging mad all together.
"And I cannot in conclusion," says Our Missis, with her spitefullest sneer,
"give you a completer pictur of that despicable nation (after what I have
related), than assuring you that they wouldn't bear our constitutional ways and
noble independence at Mugby Junction, for a single month, and that they
would turn us to the right-about and put another system in our places, as soon
as look at us; perhaps sooner, for I do not believe they have the good taste to
care to look at us twice."
The swelling tumult was arrested in its rise. Sniff, bore away by his servile
disposition, had drored up his leg with a higher and a higher relish, and was
now discovered to be waving his corkscrew over his head. It was at this
moment that Mrs. Sniff, who had kep' her eye upon him like the fabled
obelisk, descended on her victim. Our Missis followed them both out, and
cries was heard in the sawdust department.
You come into the Down Refreshment Room, at the Junction, making
believe you don't know me, and I'll pint you out with my right thumb over my
shoulder which is Our Missis, and which is Miss Whiff; and which is Miss
Piff; and which is Mrs. Sniff. But you won't get a chance to see Sniff, because

he disappeared that night. Whether he perished, tore to pieces, I cannot say;
but his corkscrew alone remains, to bear witness to the servility of his
disposition.

No. 1 BRANCH LINE
THE SIGNAL-MAN

"Halloa! Below there!"
When he heard a voice thus calling to him, he was standing at the door of
his box, with a flag in his hand, furled round its short pole. One would have
thought, considering the nature of the ground, that he could not have doubted
from what quarter the voice came; but, instead of looking up to where I stood
on the top of the steep cutting nearly over his head, he turned himself about
and looked down the Line. There was something remarkable in his manner of
doing so, though I could not have said, for my life, what. But, I know it was
remarkable enough to attract my notice, even though his figure was
foreshortened and shadowed, down in the deep trench, and mine was high
above him, so steeped in the glow of an angry sunset that I had shaded my
eyes with my hand before I saw him at all.
"Halloa! Below!"
From looking down the Line, he turned himself about again, and, raising
his eyes, saw my figure high above him.
"Is there any path by which I can come down and speak to you?"
He looked up at me without replying, and I looked down at him without
pressing him too soon with a repetition of my idle question. Just then, there
came a vague vibration in the earth and air, quickly changing into a violent
pulsation, and an oncoming rush that caused me to start back, as though it had
force to draw me down. When such vapour as rose to my height from this
rapid train, had passed me and was skimming away over the landscape, I
looked down again and saw him re-furling the flag he had shown while the
train went by.
I repeated my inquiry. After a pause, during which he seemed to regard me
with fixed attention, he motioned with his rolled-up flag towards a point on

my level, some two or three hundred yards distant. I called down to him, "All
right!" and made for that point. There, by dint of looking closely about me, I
found a rough zig-zag descending path notched out: which I followed.
The cutting was extremely deep, and unusually precipitate. It was made
through a clammy stone that became oozier and wetter as I went down. For
these reasons, I found the way long enough to give me time to recall a singular
air of reluctance or compulsion with which he had pointed out the path.
When I came down low enough upon the zig-zag descent, to see him
again, I saw that he was standing between the rails on the way by which the
train had lately passed, in an attitude as if he were waiting for me to appear.
He had his left hand at his chin, and that left elbow rested on his right hand
crossed over his breast. His attitude was one of such expectation and
watchfulness, that I stopped a moment, wondering at it.
I resumed my downward way, and, stepping out upon the level of the
railroad and drawing nearer to him, saw that he was a dark sallow man, with a
dark beard and rather heavy eyebrows. His post was in as solitary and dismal a
place as ever I saw. On either side, a dripping-wet wall of jagged stone,
excluding all view but a strip of sky; the perspective one way, only a crooked
prolongation of this great dungeon; the shorter perspective in the other
direction, terminating in a gloomy red light, and the gloomier entrance to a
black tunnel, in whose massive architecture there was a barbarous, depressing,
and forbidding air. So little sunlight ever found its way to this spot, that it had
an earthy deadly smell; and so much cold wind rushed through it, that it struck
chill to me, as if I had left the natural world.
Before he stirred, I was near enough to him to have touched him. Not even
then removing his eyes from mine, he stepped back one step, and lifted his
hand.
This was a lonesome post to occupy (I said), and it had riveted my
attention when I looked down from up yonder. A visitor was a rarity, I should
suppose; not an unwelcome rarity, I hoped? In me, he merely saw a man who
had been shut up within narrow limits all his life, and who, being at last set
free, had a newly-awakened interest in these great works. To such purpose I
spoke to him; but I am far from sure of the terms I used, for, besides that I am
not happy in opening any conversation, there was something in the man that
daunted me.
He directed a most curious look towards the red light near the tunnel's
mouth, and looked all about it, as if something were missing from it, and then
looked at me.
That light was part of his charge? Was it not?
He answered in a low voice: "Don't you know it is?"
The monstrous thought came into my mind as I perused the fixed eyes and

the saturnine face, that this was a spirit, not a man. I have speculated since,
whether there may have been infection in his mind.
In my turn, I stepped back. But in making the action, I detected in his eyes
some latent fear of me. This put the monstrous thought to flight.
"You look at me," I said, forcing a smile, "as if you had a dread of me."
"I was doubtful," he returned, "whether I had seen you before."
"Where?"
He pointed to the red light he had looked at.
"There?" I said.
Intently watchful of me, he replied (but without sound), "Yes."
"My good fellow, what should I do there? However, be that as it may, I
never was there, you may swear."
"I think I may," he rejoined. "Yes. I am sure I may."
His manner cleared, like my own. He replied to my remarks with
readiness, and in well-chosen words. Had he much to do there? Yes; that was
to say, he had enough responsibility to bear; but exactness and watchfulness
were what was required of him, and of actual work-manual labour-he had
next to none. To change that signal, to trim those lights, and to turn this iron
handle now and then, was all he had to do under that head. Regarding those
many long and lonely hours of which I seemed to make so much, he could
only say that the routine of his life had shaped itself into that form, and he had
grown used to it. He had taught himself a language down here-if only to
know it by sight, and to have formed his own crude ideas of its pronunciation,
could be called learning it. He had also worked at fractions and decimals, and
tried a little algebra; but he was, and had been as a boy, a poor hand at figures.
Was it necessary for him when on duty, always to remain in that channel of
damp air, and could he never rise into the sunshine from between those high
stone walls? Why, that depended upon times and circumstances. Under some
conditions there would be less upon the Line than under others, and the same
held good as to certain hours of the day and night. In bright weather, he did
choose occasions for getting a little above these lower shadows; but, being at
all times liable to be called by his electric bell, and at such times listening for
it with redoubled anxiety, the relief was less than I would suppose.
He took me into his box, where there was a fire, a desk for an official book
in which he had to make certain entries, a telegraphic instrument with its dial
face and needles, and the little bell of which he had spoken. On my trusting
that he would excuse the remark that he had been well educated, and (I hoped
I might say without offence), perhaps educated above that station, he observed
that instances of slight incongruity in such-wise would rarely be found
wanting among large bodies of men; that he had heard it was so in
workhouses, in the police force, even in that last desperate resource, the army;

and that he knew it was so, more or less, in any great railway staff. He had
been, when young (if I could believe it, sitting in that hut; he scarcely could), a
student of natural philosophy, and had attended lectures; but he had run wild,
misused his opportunities, gone down, and never risen again. He had no
complaint to offer about that. He had made his bed, and he lay upon it. It was
far too late to make another.
All that I have here condensed, he said in a quiet manner, with his grave
dark regards divided between me and the fire. He threw in the word "Sir,"
from time to time, and especially when he referred to his youth: as though to
request me to understand that he claimed to be nothing but what I found him.
He was several times interrupted by the little bell, and had to read off
messages, and send replies. Once, he had to stand without the door, and
display a flag as a train passed, and make some verbal communication to the
driver. In the discharge of his duties I observed him to be remarkably exact
and vigilant, breaking off his discourse at a syllable, and remaining silent until
what he had to do was done.
In a word, I should have set this man down as one of the safest of men to
be employed in that capacity, but for the circumstance that while he was
speaking to me he twice broke off with a fallen colour, turned his face towards
the little bell when it did not ring, opened the door of the hut (which was kept
shut to exclude the unhealthy damp), and looked out towards the red light near
the mouth of the tunnel. On both of those occasions, he came back to the fire
with the inexplicable air upon him which I had remarked, without being able
to define, when we were so far asunder.
Said I when I rose to leave him: "You almost make me think that I have
met with a contented man."
(I am afraid I must acknowledge that I said it to lead him on).
"I believe I used to be so," he rejoined, in the low voice in which he had
first spoken; "but I am troubled, sir, I am troubled."
He would have recalled the words if he could. He had said them, however,
and I took them up quickly.
"With what? What is your trouble?"
"It is very difficult to impart, sir. It is very, very, difficult to speak of. If
ever you make me another visit, I will try to tell you."
"But I expressly intend to make you another visit. Say, when shall it be?"
"I go off early in the morning, and I shall be on again at ten to-morrow
night, sir."
"I will come at eleven."
He thanked me, and went out at the door with me. "I'll show my white
light, sir," he said, in his peculiar low voice, "till you have found the way up.

When you have found it, don't call out! And when you are at the top, don't
call out!"
His manner seemed to make the place strike colder to me, but I said no
more than "Very well."
"And when you come down to-morrow night, don't call out! Let me ask
you a parting question. What made you cry 'Halloa! Below there!' to-night?"
"Heaven knows," said I. "I cried something to that effect-"
"Not to that effect, sir. Those were the very words. I know them well."
"Admit those were the very words. I said them, no doubt, because I saw
you below."
"For no other reason?"
"What other reason could I possibly have!"
"You had no feeling that they were conveyed to you in any supernatural
way?"
"No."
He wished me good night, and held up his light. I walked by the side of the
down Line of rails (with a very disagreeable sensation of a train coming
behind me), until I found the path. It was easier to mount than to descend, and
I got back to my inn without any adventure.
Punctual to my appointment, I placed my foot on the first notch of the zigzag next night, as the distant clocks were striking eleven. He was waiting for
me at the bottom, with his white light on. "I have not called out," I said, when
we came close together; "may I speak now?" "By all means, sir." "Good night
then, and here's my hand." "Good night, sir, and here's mine." With that, we
walked side by side to his box, entered it, closed the door, and sat down by the
fire.
"I have made up my mind, sir," he began, bending forward as soon as we
were seated, and speaking in a tone but a little above a whisper, "that you shall
not have to ask me twice what troubles me. I took you for some one else
yesterday evening. That troubles me."
"That mistake?"
"No. That some one else."
"Who is it?"
"I don't know."
"Like me?"
"I don't know. I never saw the face. The left arm is across the face, and the
right arm is waved. Violently waved. This way."
I followed his action with my eyes, and it was the action of an arm

gesticulating with the utmost passion and vehemence: "For God's sake clear
the way!"
"One moonlight night," said the man, "I was sitting here, when I heard a
voice cry 'Halloa! Below there!' I started up, looked from that door, and saw
this Some one else standing by the red light near the tunnel, waving as I just
now showed you. The voice seemed hoarse with shouting, and it cried, 'Look
out! Look out!' And then again 'Halloa! Below there! Look out!' I caught up
my lamp, turned it on red, and ran towards the figure, calling, 'What's wrong?
What has happened? Where?' It stood just outside the blackness of the tunnel.
I advanced so close upon it that I wondered at its keeping the sleeve across its
eyes. I ran right up at it, and had my hand stretched out to pull the sleeve
away, when it was gone."
"Into the tunnel," said I.
"No. I ran on, into the tunnel, five hundred yards. I stopped and held my
lamp above my head, and saw the figures of the measured distance, and saw
the wet stains stealing down the walls and trickling through the arch. I ran out
again, faster than I had run in (for I had a mortal abhorrence of the place upon
me), and I looked all round the red light with my own red light, and I went up
the iron ladder to the gallery atop of it, and I came down again, and ran back
here. I telegraphed both ways: 'An alarm has been given. Is anything wrong?'
The answer came back, both ways: 'All well.'"
Resisting the slow touch of a frozen finger tracing out my spine, I showed
him how that this figure must be a deception of his sense of sight, and how
that figures, originating in disease of the delicate nerves that minister to the
functions of the eye, were known to have often troubled patients, some of
whom had become conscious of the nature of their affliction, and had even
proved it by experiments upon themselves. "As to an imaginary cry," said I,
"do but listen for a moment to the wind in this unnatural valley while we
speak so low, and to the wild harp it makes of the telegraph wires!"
That was all very well, he returned, after we had sat listening for a while,
and he ought to know something of the wind and the wires, he who so often
passed long winter nights there, alone and watching. But he would beg to
remark that he had not finished.
I asked his pardon, and he slowly added these words, touching my arm:
"Within six hours after the Appearance, the memorable accident on this
Line happened, and within ten hours the dead and wounded were brought
along through the tunnel over the spot where the figure had stood."
A disagreeable shudder crept over me, but I did my best against it. It was
not to be denied, I rejoined, that this was a remarkable coincidence, calculated
deeply to impress his mind. But, it was unquestionable that remarkable
coincidences did continually occur, and they must be taken into account in
dealing with such a subject. Though to be sure I must admit, I added (for I

thought I saw that he was going to bring the objection to bear upon me), men
of common sense did not allow much for coincidences in making the ordinary
calculations of life.
He again begged to remark that he had not finished.
I again begged his pardon for being betrayed into interruptions.
"This," he said, again laying his hand upon my arm, and glancing over his
shoulder with hollow eyes, "was just a year ago. Six or seven months passed,
and I had recovered from the surprise and shock, when one morning, as the
day was breaking, I, standing at that door, looked towards the red light, and
saw the spectre again." He stopped, with a fixed look at me.
"Did it cry out?"
"No. It was silent."
"Did it wave its arm?"
"No. It leaned against the shaft of the light, with both hands before the
face. Like this."
Once more, I followed his action with my eyes. It was an action of
mourning. I have seen such an attitude in stone figures on tombs.
"Did you go up to it?"
"I came in and sat down, partly to collect my thoughts, partly because it
had turned me faint. When I went to the door again, daylight was above me,
and the ghost was gone."
"But nothing followed? Nothing came of this?"
He touched me on the arm with his forefinger twice or thrice, giving a
ghastly nod each time:
"That very day, as a train came out of the tunnel, I noticed, at a carriage
window on my side, what looked like a confusion of hands and heads, and
something waved. I saw it, just in time to signal the driver, Stop! He shut off,
and put his brake on, but the train drifted past here a hundred and fifty yards or
more. I ran after it, and, as I went along, heard terrible screams and cries. A
beautiful young lady had died instantaneously in one of the compartments, and
was brought in here, and laid down on this floor between us."
Involuntarily, I pushed my chair back, as I looked from the boards at
which he pointed, to himself.
"True, sir. True. Precisely as it happened, so I tell it you."
I could think of nothing to say, to any purpose, and my mouth was very
dry. The wind and the wires took up the story with a long lamenting wail.
He resumed. "Now, sir, mark this, and judge how my mind is troubled.
The spectre came back, a week ago. Ever since, it has been there, now and

again, by fits and starts."
"At the light?"
"At the Danger-light."
"What does it seem to do?"
He repeated, if possible with increased passion and vehemence, that
former gesticulation of "For God's sake clear the way!"
Then, he went on. "I have no peace or rest for it. It calls to me, for many
minutes together, in an agonised manner, 'Below there! Look out! Look out!'
It stands waving to me. It rings my little bell-"
I caught at that. "Did it ring your bell yesterday evening when I was here,
and you went to the door?"
"Twice."
"Why, see," said I, "how your imagination misleads you. My eyes were on
the bell, and my ears were open to the bell, and if I am a living man, it did not
ring at those times. No, nor at any other time, except when it was rung in the
natural course of physical things by the station communicating with you."
He shook his head. "I have never made a mistake as to that, yet, sir. I have
never confused the spectre's ring with the man's. The ghost's ring is a strange
vibration in the bell that it derives from nothing else, and I have not asserted
that the bell stirs to the eye. I don't wonder that you failed to hear it. But I
heard it."
"And did the spectre seem to be there, when you looked out?"
"It was there."
"Both times?"
He repeated firmly: "Both times."
"Will you come to the door with me, and look for it now?"
He bit his under-lip as though he were somewhat unwilling, but arose. I
opened the door, and stood on the step, while he stood in the doorway. There,
was the Danger-light. There, was the dismal mouth of the tunnel. There, were
the high wet stone walls of the cutting. There, were the stars above them.
"Do you see it?" I asked him, taking particular note of his face. His eyes
were prominent and strained; but not very much more so, perhaps, than my
own had been when I had directed them earnestly towards the same spot.
"No," he answered. "It is not there."
"Agreed," said I.
We went in again, shut the door, and resumed our seats. I was thinking
how best to improve this advantage, if it might be called one, when he took up
the conversation in such a matter of course way, so assuming that there could

be no serious question of fact between us, that I felt myself placed in the
weakest of positions.
"By this time you will fully understand, sir," he said, "that what troubles
me so dreadfully, is the question, What does the spectre mean?"
I was not sure, I told him, that I did fully understand.
"What is its warning against?" he said, ruminating, with his eyes on the
fire, and only by times turning them on me. "What is the danger? Where is the
danger? There is danger overhanging, somewhere on the Line. Some dreadful
calamity will happen. It is not to be doubted this third time, after what has
gone before. But surely this is a cruel haunting of me. What can I do!"
He pulled out his handkerchief, and wiped the drops from his heated
forehead.
"If I telegraph Danger, on either side of me, or on both, I can give no
reason for it," he went on, wiping the palms of his hands. "I should get into
trouble, and do no good. They would think I was mad. This is the way it
would work:-Message: 'Danger! Take care!' Answer: 'What danger?
Where?' Message: 'Don't know. But for God's sake take care!' They would
displace me. What else could they do?"
His pain of mind was most pitiable to see. It was the mental torture of a
conscientious man, oppressed beyond endurance by an unintelligible
responsibility involving life.
"When it first stood under the Danger-light," he went on, putting his dark
hair back from his head, and drawing his hands outward across and across his
temples in an extremity of feverish distress, "why not tell me where that
accident was to happen-if it must happen? Why not tell me how it could be
averted-if it could have been averted? When on its second coming it hid its
face, why not tell me instead: 'She is going to die. Let them keep her at
home'? If it came, on those two occasions, only to show me that its warnings
were true, and so to prepare me for the third, why not warn me plainly now?
And I, Lord help me! A mere poor signal-man on this solitary station! Why
not go to somebody with credit to be believed, and power to act!"
When I saw him in this state, I saw that for the poor man's sake, as well as
for the public safety, what I had to do for the time was, to compose his mind.
Therefore, setting aside all question of reality or unreality between us, I
represented to him that whoever thoroughly discharged his duty, must do well,
and that at least it was his comfort that he understood his duty, though he did
not understand these confounding Appearances. In this effort I succeeded far
better than in the attempt to reason him out of his conviction. He became
calm; the occupations incidental to his post as the night advanced, began to
make larger demands on his attention; and I left him at two in the morning. I
had offered to stay through the night, but he would not hear of it.

That I more than once looked back at the red light as I ascended the
pathway, that I did not like the red light, and that I should have slept but
poorly if my bed had been under it, I see no reason to conceal. Nor, did I like
the two sequences of the accident and the dead girl. I see no reason to conceal
that, either.
But, what ran most in my thoughts was the consideration how ought I to
act, having become the recipient of this disclosure? I had proved the man to be
intelligent, vigilant, painstaking, and exact; but how long might he remain so,
in his state of mind? Though in a subordinate position, still he held a most
important trust, and would I (for instance) like to stake my own life on the
chances of his continuing to execute it with precision?
Unable to overcome a feeling that there would be something treacherous in
my communicating what he had told me, to his superiors in the Company,
without first being plain with himself and proposing a middle course to him, I
ultimately resolved to offer to accompany him (otherwise keeping his secret
for the present) to the wisest medical practitioner we could hear of in those
parts, and to take his opinion. A change in his time of duty would come round
next night, he had apprised me, and he would be off an hour or two after
sunrise, and on again soon after sunset. I had appointed to return accordingly.
Next evening was a lovely evening, and I walked out early to enjoy it. The
sun was not yet quite down when I traversed the field-path near the top of the
deep cutting. I would extend my walk for an hour, I said to myself, half an
hour on and half an hour back, and it would then be time to go to my signalman's box.
Before pursuing my stroll, I stepped to the brink, and mechanically looked
down, from the point from which I had first seen him. I cannot describe the
thrill that seized upon me, when, close at the mouth of the tunnel, I saw the
appearance of a man, with his left sleeve across his eyes, passionately waving
his right arm.
The nameless horror that oppressed me, passed in a moment, for in a
moment I saw that this appearance of a man was a man indeed, and that there
was a little group of other men standing at a short distance, to whom he
seemed to be rehearsing the gesture he made. The Danger-light was not yet
lighted. Against its shaft, a little low hut, entirely new to me, had been made
of some wooden supports and tarpaulin. It looked no bigger than a bed.
With an irresistible sense that something was wrong-with a flashing selfreproachful fear that fatal mischief had come of my leaving the man there, and
causing no one to be sent to overlook or correct what he did-I descended the
notched path with all the speed I could make.
"What is the matter?" I asked the men.
"Signal-man killed this morning, sir."

"Not the man belonging to that box?"
"Yes, sir."
"Not the man I know?"
"You will recognise him, sir, if you knew him," said the man who spoke
for the others, solemnly uncovering his own head and raising an end of the
tarpaulin, "for his face is quite composed."
"O! how did this happen, how did this happen?" I asked, turning from one
to another as the hut closed in again.
"He was cut down by an engine, sir. No man in England knew his work
better. But somehow he was not clear of the outer rail. It was just at broad day.
He had struck the light, and had the lamp in his hand. As the engine came out
of the tunnel, his back was towards her, and she cut him down. That man
drove her, and was showing how it happened. Show the gentleman, Tom."
The man, who wore a rough dark dress, stepped back to his former place at
the mouth of the tunnel:
"Coming round the curve in the tunnel, sir," he said, "I saw him at the end,
like as if I saw him down a perspective-glass. There was no time to check
speed, and I knew him to be very careful. As he didn't seem to take heed of
the whistle, I shut it off when we were running down upon him, and called to
him as loud as I could call."
"What did you say?"
"I said, Below there! Look out! Look out! For God's sake clear the way!"
I started.
"Ah! it was a dreadful time, sir. I never left off calling to him. I put this
arm before my eyes, not to see, and I waved this arm to the last; but it was no
use."
Without prolonging the narrative to dwell on any one of its curious
circumstances more than on any other, I may, in closing it, point out the
coincidence that the warning of the Engine-Driver included, not only the
words which the unfortunate Signal-man had repeated to me as haunting him,
but also the words which I myself-not he-had attached, and that only in my
own mind, to the gesticulation he had imitated.

No. 2 BRANCH LINE

THE ENGINE-DRIVER

"Altogether? Well. Altogether, since 1841, I've killed seven men and
boys. It ain't many in all those years."
These startling words he uttered in a serious tone as he leaned against the
Station-wall. He was a thick-set, ruddy-faced man, with coal-black eyes, the
whites of which were not white, but a brownish-yellow, and apparently scarred
and seamed, as if they had been operated upon. They were eyes that had
worked hard in looking through wind and weather. He was dressed in a short
black pea-jacket and grimy white canvas trousers, and wore on his head a flat
black cap. There was no sign of levity in his face. His look was serious even to
sadness, and there was an air of responsibility about his whole bearing which
assured me that he spoke in earnest.
"Yes, sir, I have been for five-and-twenty years a Locomotive Enginedriver; and in all that time, I've only killed seven men and boys. There's not
many of my mates as can say as much for themselves. Steadiness, sir-
steadiness and keeping your eyes open, is what does it. When I say seven men
and boys, I mean my mates-stokers, porters, and so forth. I don't count
passengers."
How did he become an engine-driver?
"My father," he said, "was a wheelwright in a small way, and lived in a
little cottage by the side of the railway which runs betwixt Leeds and Selby. It
was the second railway laid down in the kingdom, the second after the
Liverpool and Manchester, where Mr. Huskisson was killed, as you may have
heard on, sir. When the trains rushed by, we young 'uns used to run out to look
at 'em, and hooray. I noticed the driver turning handles, and making it go, and
I thought to myself it would be a fine thing to be a engine-driver, and have the
control of a wonderful machine like that. Before the railway, the driver of the
mail-coach was the biggest man I knew. I thought I should like to be the driver
of a coach. We had a picture in our cottage of George the Third in a red coat. I
always mixed up the driver of the mail-coach-who had a red coat, too-with
the king, only he had a low-crowned broad-brimmed hat, which the king
hadn't. In my idea, the king couldn't be a greater man than the driver of the
mail-coach. I had always a fancy to be a head man of some kind. When I went
to Leeds once, and saw a man conducting a orchestra, I thought I should like
to be the conductor of a orchestra. When I went home I made myself a baton,
and went about the fields conducting a orchestra. It wasn't there, of course, but
I pretended it was. At another time, a man with a whip and a speakingtrumpet, on the stage outside a show, took my fancy, and I thought I should
like to be him. But when the train came, the engine-driver put them all in the

shade, and I was resolved to be a engine-driver. It wasn't long before I had to
do something to earn my own living, though I was only a young 'un. My
father died suddenly-he was killed by thunder and lightning while standing
under a tree out of the rain-and mother couldn't keep us all. The day after my
father's burial I walked down to the station, and said I wanted to be a enginedriver. The station-master laughed a bit, said I was for beginning early, but that
I was not quite big enough yet. He gave me a penny, and told me to go home
and grow, and come again in ten years' time. I didn't dream of danger then. If I
couldn't be a engine-driver, I was determined to have something to do about a
engine; so, as I could get nothing else, I went on board a Humber steamer, and
broke up coals for the stoker. That was how I began. From that, I became a
stoker, first on board a boat, and then on a locomotive. Then, after two years'
service, I became a driver on the very Line which passed our cottage. My
mother and my brothers and sisters came out to look at me, the first day I
drove. I was watching for them and they was watching for me, and they waved
their hands and hoora'd, and I waved my hand to them. I had the steam well
up, and was going at a rattling pace, and rare proud I was that minute. Never
was so proud in my life!
"When a man has a liking for a thing it's as good as being clever. In a very
short time I became one of the best drivers on the Line. That was allowed. I
took a pride in it, you see, and liked it. No, I didn't know much about the
engine scientifically, as you call it; but I could put her to rights if anything
went out of gear-that is to say, if there was nothing broken-but I couldn't
have explained how the steam worked inside. Starting a engine, it's just like
drawing a drop of gin. You turn a handle and off she goes; then you turn the
handle the other way, put on the brakes, and you stop her. There's not much
more in it, so far. It's no good being scientific and knowing the principle of the
engine inside; no good at all. Fitters, who know all the ins and outs of the
engine, make the worst drivers. That's well known. They know too much. It's
just as I've heard of a man with regard to his inside: if he knew what a
complicated machine it is, he would never eat, or drink, or dance, or run, or do
anything, for fear of busting something. So it is with fitters. But us as are not
troubled with such thoughts, we go ahead.
"But starting a engine's one thing and driving of her is another. Any one, a
child a'most, can turn on the steam and turn it off again; but it ain't every one
that can keep a engine well on the road, no more than it ain't every one who
can ride a horse properly. It is much the same thing. If you gallop a horse right
off for a mile or two, you take the wind out of him, and for the next mile or
two you must let him trot or walk. So it is with a engine. If you put on too
much steam, to get over the ground at the start, you exhaust the boiler, and
then you'll have to crawl along till your fresh water boils up. The great thing
in driving, is, to go steady, never to let your water get too low, nor your fire
too low. It's the same with a kettle. If you fill it up when it's about half empty,
it soon comes to the boil again; but if you don't fill it up until the water's

nearly out, it's a long time in coming to the boil again. Another thing; you
should never make spurts, unless you are detained and lose time. You should
go up a incline and down a incline at the same pace. Sometimes a driver will
waste his steam, and when he comes to a hill he has scarcely enough to drag
him up. When you're in a train that goes by fits and starts, you may be sure
that there is a bad driver on the engine. That kind of driving frightens
passengers dreadful. When the train, after rattling along, suddenly slackens
speed when it ain't near a station, it may be in the middle of a tunnel, the
passengers think there is danger. But generally it's because the driver has
exhausted his steam.
"I drove the Brighton express, four or five years before I come here, and
the annuals-that is, the passengers who had annual tickets-always said they
knew when I was on the engine, because they wasn't jerked. Gentlemen used
to say as they came on to the platform, 'Who drives to-day-Jim Martin?' And
when the guard told them yes, they said 'All right,' and took their seats quite
comfortable. But the driver never gets so much as a shilling; the guard comes
in for all that, and he does nothing much. Few ever think of the driver. I dare
say they think the train goes along of itself; yet if we didn't keep a sharp lookout, know our duty, and do it, they might all go smash at any moment. I used
to make that journey to Brighton in fifty-two minutes. The papers said fortynine minutes, but that was coming it a little too strong. I had to watch signals
all the way, one every two miles, so that me and my stoker were on the stretch
all the time, doing two things at once-attending to the engine and looking
out. I've driven on this Line, eighty-one miles and three-quarters, in eighty-six
minutes. There's no danger in speed if you have a good road, a good engine,
and not too many coaches behind. No, we don't call them carriages, we call
them 'coaches.'
"Yes; oscillation means danger. If you're ever in a coach that oscillates
much, tell of it at the first station and get it coupled up closer. Coaches when
they're too loose are apt to jump, or swing off the rails; and it's quite as
dangerous when they're coupled up too close. There ought to be just space
enough for the buffers to work easy. Passengers are frightened in tunnels, but
there's less danger, now, in tunnels than anywhere else. We never enter a
tunnel unless it's signalled Clear.
"A train can be stopped wonderful quick, even when running express, if
the guards act with the driver and clap on all the brakes promptly. Much
depends upon the guards. One brake behind, is as good as two in front. The
engine, you see, loses weight as she burns her coals and consumes her water,
but the coaches behind don't alter. We have a good deal of trouble with young
guards. In their anxiety to perform their duties, they put on the brakes too
soon, so that sometimes we can scarcely drag the train into the station; when
they grow older at it they are not so anxious, and don't put them on soon
enough. It's no use to say, when an accident happens, that they did not put on

the brakes in time; they swear they did, and you can't prove that they didn't.
"Do I think that the tapping of the wheels with a hammer is a mere
ceremony? Well, I don't know exactly; I should not like to say. It's not often
that the chaps find anything wrong. They may sometimes be half asleep when
a train comes into a station in the middle of the night. You would be yourself.
They ought to tap the axle-box, but they don't.
"Many accidents take place that never get into the papers; many trains, full
of passengers, escape being dashed to pieces by next door to a miracle.
Nobody knows anything about it but the driver and the stoker. I remember
once, when I was driving on the Eastern Counties. Going round a curve, I
suddenly saw a train coming along on the same line of rails. I clapped on the
brake, but it was too late, I thought. Seeing the engine almost close upon us, I
cried to my stoker to jump. He jumped off the engine, almost before the words
were out of my mouth. I was just taking my hand off the lever to follow, when
the coming train turned off on the points, and the next instant the hind coach
passed my engine by a shave. It was the nearest touch I ever saw. My stoker
was killed. In another half second I should have jumped off and been killed
too. What would have become of the train without us is more than I can tell
you.
"There are heaps of people run over, that no one ever hears about. One
dark night in the Black Country, me and my mate felt something wet and
warm splash in our faces. 'That didn't come from the engine, Bill,' I said.
'No,' he said; 'it's something thick, Jim.' It was blood. That's what it was. We
heard afterwards that a collier had been run over. When we kill any of our own
chaps, we say as little about it as possible. It's generally-mostly always-
their own fault. No, we never think of danger ourselves. We're used to it, you
see. But we're not reckless. I don't believe there's any body of men that takes
more pride in their work than engine-drivers do. We are as proud and as fond
of our engines as if they were living things; as proud of them as a huntsman or
a jockey is of his horse. And a engine has almost as many ways as a horse;
she's a kicker, a plunger, a roarer, or what not, in her way. Put a stranger on to
my engine, and he wouldn't know what to do with her. Yes; there's wonderful
improvements in engines since the last great Exhibition. Some of them take up
their water without stopping. That's a wonderful invention, and yet as simple
as A B C. There are water-troughs at certain places, lying between the rails. By
moving a lever you let down the mouth of a scoop into the water, and as you
rush along the water is forced into the tank, at the rate of three thousand
gallons a minute.
"A engine-driver's chief anxiety is to keep time; that's what he thinks most
of. When I was driving the Brighton express, I always felt like as if I was
riding a race against time. I had no fear of the pace; what I feared was losing
way, and not getting in to the minute. We have to give in an account of our
time when we arrive. The company provides us with watches, and we go by

them. Before starting on a journey, we pass through a room to be inspected.
That's to see if we are sober. But they don't say nothing to us, and a man who
was a little gone might pass easy. I've known a stoker that had passed the
inspection, come on to the engine as drunk as a fly, flop down among the
coals, and sleep there like a log for the whole run. I had to be my own stoker
then. If you ask me if engine-drivers are drinking men, I must answer you that
they are pretty well. It's trying work; one half of you cold as ice; t'other half
hot as fire; wet one minute, dry the next. If ever a man had an excuse for
drinking, that man's a engine-driver. And yet I don't know if ever a driver
goes upon his engine drunk. If he was to, the wind would soon sober him.
"I believe engine-drivers, as a body, are the healthiest fellows alive; but
they don't live long. The cause of that, I believe to be the cold food, and the
shaking. By the cold food, I mean that a engine-driver never gets his meals
comfortable. He's never at home to his dinner. When he starts away the first
thing in the morning, he takes a bit of cold meat and a piece of bread with him
for his dinner; and generally he has to eat it in the shed, for he mustn't leave
his engine. You can understand how the jolting and shaking knocks a man up,
after a bit. The insurance companies won't take us at ordinary rates. We're
obliged to be Foresters, or Old Friends, or that sort of thing, where they ain't
so particular. The wages of a engine-driver average about eight shillings a day,
but if he's a good schemer with his coals-yes, I mean if he economises his
coals-he's allowed so much more. Some will make from five to ten shillings
a week that way. I don't complain of the wages particular; but it's hard lines
for such as us, to have to pay income-tax. The company gives an account of all
our wages, and we have to pay. It's a shame.
"Our domestic life-our life at home, you mean? Well, as to that, we don't
see much of our families. I leave home at half-past seven in the morning, and
don't get back again until half-past nine, or maybe later. The children are not
up when I leave, and they've gone to bed again before I come home. This is
about my day:-Leave London at 8.45; drive for four hours and a half; cold
snack on the engine step; see to engine; drive back again; clean engine; report
myself; and home. Twelve hours' hard and anxious work, and no comfortable
victuals. Yes, our wives are anxious about us; for we never know when we go
out, if we'll ever come back again. We ought to go home the minute we leave
the station, and report ourselves to those that are thinking on us and depending
on us; but I'm afraid we don't always. Perhaps we go first to the public-house,
and perhaps you would, too, if you were in charge of a engine all day long.
But the wives have a way of their own, of finding out if we're all right. They
inquire among each other. 'Have you seen my Jim?' one says. 'No,' says
another, 'but Jack see him coming out of the station half an hour ago.' Then
she knows that her Jim's all right, and knows where to find him if she wants
him. It's a sad thing when any of us have to carry bad news to a mate's wife.
None of us likes that job. I remember when Jack Davidge was killed, none of
us could face his poor missus with the news. She had seven children, poor

thing, and two of 'em, the youngest, was down with the fever. We got old Mrs.
Berridge-Tom Berridge's mother-to break it to her. But she knew summat
was the matter, the minute the old woman went in, and, afore she spoke a
word, fell down like as if she was dead. She lay all night like that, and never
heard from mortal lips until next morning that her Jack was killed. But she
knew it in her heart. It's a pitch and toss kind of a life ours!
"And yet I never was nervous on a engine but once. I never think of my
own life. You go in for staking that, when you begin, and you get used to the
risk. I never think of the passengers either. The thoughts of a engine-driver
never go behind his engine. If he keeps his engine all right, the coaches behind
will be all right, as far as the driver is concerned. But once I did think of the
passengers. My little boy, Bill, was among them that morning. He was a poor
little cripple fellow that we all loved more nor the others, because he was a
cripple, and so quiet, and wise-like. He was going down to his aunt in the
country, who was to take care of him for a while. We thought the country air
would do him good. I did think there were lives behind me that morning; at
least, I thought hard of one little life that was in my hands. There were twenty
coaches on; my little Bill seemed to me to be in every one of 'em. My hand
trembled as I turned on the steam. I felt my heart thumping as we drew close
to the pointsman's box; as we neared the Junction, I was all in a cold sweat. At
the end of the first fifty miles I was nearly eleven minutes behind time.
'What's the matter with you this morning?' my stoker said. 'Did you have a
drop too much last night?' 'Don't speak to me, Fred,' I said, 'till we get to
Peterborough; and keep a sharp look-out, there's a good fellow.' I never was so
thankful in my life as when I shut off steam to enter the station at
Peterborough. Little Bill's aunt was waiting for him, and I saw her lift him out
of the carriage. I called out to her to bring him to me, and I took him upon the
engine and kissed him-ah, twenty times I should think-making him in such
a mess with grease and coal-dust as you never saw.
"I was all right for the rest of the journey. And I do believe, sir, the
passengers were safer after little Bill was gone. It would never do, you see, for
engine-drivers to know too much, or to feel too much."

No. 3 BRANCH LINE
THE COMPENSATION HOUSE

"There's not a looking-glass in all the house, sir. It's some peculiar fancy
of my master's. There isn't one in any single room in the house."
It was a dark and gloomy-looking building, and had been purchased by
this Company for an enlargement of their Goods Station. The value of the
house had been referred to what was popularly called "a compensation jury,"
and the house was called, in consequence, The Compensation House. It had
become the Company's property; but its tenant still remained in possession,
pending the commencement of active building operations. My attention was
originally drawn to this house because it stood directly in front of a collection
of huge pieces of timber which lay near this part of the Line, and on which I
sometimes sat for half an hour at a time, when I was tired by my wanderings
about Mugby Junction.
It was square, cold, grey-looking, built of rough-hewn stone, and roofed
with thin slabs of the same material. Its windows were few in number, and
very small for the size of the building. In the great blank, grey broad-side,
there were only four windows. The entrance-door was in the middle of the
house; there was a window on either side of it, and there were two more in the
single story above. The blinds were all closely drawn, and, when the door was
shut, the dreary building gave no sign of life or occupation.
But the door was not always shut. Sometimes it was opened from within,
with a great jingling of bolts and door-chains, and then a man would come
forward and stand upon the door-step, snuffing the air as one might do who
was ordinarily kept on rather a small allowance of that element. He was stout,
thick-set, and perhaps fifty or sixty years old-a man whose hair was cut
exceedingly close, who wore a large bushy beard, and whose eye had a
sociable twinkle in it which was prepossessing. He was dressed, whenever I
saw him, in a greenish-brown frock-coat made of some material which was
not cloth, wore a waistcoat and trousers of light colour, and had a frill to his
shirt-an ornament, by the way, which did not seem to go at all well with the
beard, which was continually in contact with it. It was the custom of this
worthy person, after standing for a short time on the threshold inhaling the air,
to come forward into the road, and, after glancing at one of the upper windows
in a half mechanical way, to cross over to the logs, and, leaning over the fence
which guarded the railway, to look up and down the Line (it passed before the
house) with the air of a man accomplishing a self-imposed task of which
nothing was expected to come. This done, he would cross the road again, and
turning on the threshold to take a final sniff of air, disappeared once more
within the house, bolting and chaining the door again as if there were no
probability of its being reopened for at least a week. Yet half an hour had not
passed before he was out in the road again, sniffing the air and looking up and
down the Line as before.
It was not very long before I managed to scrape acquaintance with this

restless personage. I soon found out that my friend with the shirt-frill was the
confidential servant, butler, valet, factotum, what you will, of a sick
gentleman, a Mr. Oswald Strange, who had recently come to inhabit the house
opposite, and concerning whose history my new acquaintance, whose name I
ascertained was Masey, seemed disposed to be somewhat communicative. His
master, it appeared, had come down to this place, partly for the sake of
reducing his establishment-not, Mr. Masey was swift to inform me, on
economical principles, but because the poor gentleman, for particular reasons,
wished to have few dependents about him-partly in order that he might be
near his old friend, Dr. Garden, who was established in the neighbourhood,
and whose society and advice were necessary to Mr. Strange's life. That life
was, it appeared, held by this suffering gentleman on a precarious tenure. It
was ebbing away fast with each passing hour. The servant already spoke of his
master in the past tense, describing him to me as a young gentleman not more
than five-and-thirty years of age, with a young face, as far as the features and
build of it went, but with an expression which had nothing of youth about it.
This was the great peculiarity of the man. At a distance he looked younger
than he was by many years, and strangers, at the time when he had been used
to get about, always took him for a man of seven or eight-and-twenty, but they
changed their minds on getting nearer to him. Old Masey had a way of his
own of summing up the peculiarities of his master, repeating twenty times
over: "Sir, he was Strange by name, and Strange by nature, and Strange to
look at into the bargain."
It was during my second or third interview with the old fellow that he
uttered the words quoted at the beginning of this plain narrative.
"Not such a thing as a looking-glass in all the house," the old man said,
standing beside my piece of timber, and looking across reflectively at the
house opposite. "Not one."
"In the sitting-rooms, I suppose you mean?"
"No, sir, I mean sitting-rooms and bedrooms both; there isn't so much as a
shaving-glass as big as the palm of your hand anywhere."
"But how is it?" I asked. "Why are there no looking-glasses in any of the
rooms?"
"Ah, sir!" replied Masey, "that's what none of us can ever tell. There is the
mystery. It's just a fancy on the part of my master. He had some strange
fancies, and this was one of them. A pleasant gentleman he was to live with, as
any servant could desire. A liberal gentleman, and one who gave but little
trouble; always ready with a kind word, and a kind deed, too, for the matter of
that. There was not a house in all the parish of St. George's (in which we lived
before we came down here) where the servants had more holidays or a better
table kept; but, for all that, he had his queer ways and his fancies, as I may call
them, and this was one of them. And the point he made of it, sir," the old man

went on; "the extent to which that regulation was enforced, whenever a new
servant was engaged; and the changes in the establishment it occasioned. In
hiring a new servant, the very first stipulation made, was that about the
looking-glasses. It was one of my duties to explain the thing, as far as it could
be explained, before any servant was taken into the house. 'You'll find it an
easy place,' I used to say, 'with a liberal table, good wages, and a deal of
leisure; but there's one thing you must make up your mind to; you must do
without looking-glasses while you're here, for there isn't one in the house,
and, what's more, there never will be.'"
"But how did you know there never would be one?" I asked.
"Lor' bless you, sir! If you'd seen and heard all that I'd seen and heard,
you could have no doubt about it. Why, only to take one instance:-I
remember a particular day when my master had occasion to go into the
housekeeper's room where the cook lived, to see about some alterations that
were making, and when a pretty scene took place. The cook-she was a very
ugly woman, and awful vain-had left a little bit of looking-glass, about six
inches square, upon the chimney-piece; she had got it surreptious, and kept it
always locked up; but she'd left it out, being called away suddenly, while
titivating her hair. I had seen the glass, and was making for the chimney-piece
as fast as I could; but master came in front of it before I could get there, and it
was all over in a moment. He gave one long piercing look into it, turned
deadly pale, and seizing the glass, dashed it into a hundred pieces on the floor,
and then stamped upon the fragments and ground them into powder with his
feet. He shut himself up for the rest of that day in his own room, first ordering
me to discharge the cook, then and there, at a moment's notice."
"What an extraordinary thing!" I said, pondering.
"Ah, sir," continued the old man, "it was astonishing what trouble I had
with those women-servants. It was difficult to get any that would take the
place at all under the circumstances. 'What not so much as a mossul to do
one's 'air at?' they would say, and they'd go off, in spite of extra wages. Then
those who did consent to come, what lies they would tell, to be sure! They
would protest that they didn't want to look in the glass, that they never had
been in the habit of looking in the glass, and all the while that very wench
would have her looking-glass of some kind or another, hid away among her
clothes up-stairs. Sooner or later, she would bring it out too, and leave it about
somewhere or other (just like the cook), where it was as likely as not that
master might see it. And then-for girls like that have no consciences, sir-
when I had caught one of 'em at it, she'd turn round as bold as brass, 'And
how am I to know whether my 'air's parted straight?' she'd say, just as if it
hadn't been considered in her wages that that was the very thing which she
never was to know while she lived in our house. A vain lot, sir, and the ugly
ones always the vainest. There was no end to their dodges. They'd have
looking-glasses in the interiors of their workbox-lids, where it was next to

impossible that I could find 'em, or inside the covers of hymn-books, or
cookery-books, or in their caddies. I recollect one girl, a sly one she was, and
marked with the small-pox terrible, who was always reading her prayer-book
at odd times. Sometimes I used to think what a religious mind she'd got, and
at other times (depending on the mood I was in) I would conclude that it was
the marriage-service she was studying; but one day, when I got behind her to
satisfy my doubts-lo and behold! it was the old story: a bit of glass, without a
frame, fastened into the kiver with the outside edges of the sheets of postagestamps. Dodges! Why they'd keep their looking-glasses in the scullery or the
coal-cellar, or leave them in charge of the servants next door, or with the milkwoman round the corner; but have 'em they would. And I don't mind
confessing, sir," said the old man, bringing his long speech to an end, "that it
was an inconveniency not to have so much as a scrap to shave before. I used to
go to the barber's at first, but I soon gave that up, and took to wearing my
beard as my master did; likewise to keeping my hair"-Mr. Masey touched his
head as he spoke-"so short, that it didn't require any parting, before or
behind."
I sat for some time lost in amazement, and staring at my companion. My
curiosity was powerfully stimulated, and the desire to learn more was very
strong within me.
"Had your master any personal defect," I inquired, "which might have
made it distressing to him to see his own image reflected?"
"By no means, sir," said the old man. "He was as handsome a gentleman
as you would wish to see: a little delicate-looking and careworn, perhaps, with
a very pale face; but as free from any deformity as you or I, sir. No, sir, no; it
was nothing of that."
"Then what was it? What is it?" I asked, desperately. "Is there no one who
is, or has been, in your master's confidence?"
"Yes, sir," said the old fellow, with his eyes turning to that window
opposite. "There is one person who knows all my master's secrets, and this
secret among the rest."
"And who is that?"
The old man turned round and looked at me fixedly. "The doctor here," he
said. "Dr. Garden. My master's very old friend."
"I should like to speak with this gentleman," I said, involuntarily.
"He is with my master now," answered Masey. "He will be coming out
presently, and I think I may say he will answer any question you may like to
put to him." As the old man spoke, the door of the house opened, and a
middle-aged gentleman, who was tall and thin, but who lost something of his
height by a habit of stooping, appeared on the step. Old Masey left me in a
moment. He muttered something about taking the doctor's directions, and

hastened across the road. The tall gentleman spoke to him for a minute or two
very seriously, probably about the patient up-stairs, and it then seemed to me
from their gestures that I myself was the subject of some further conversation
between them. At all events, when old Masey retired into the house, the doctor
came across to where I was standing, and addressed me with a very agreeable
smile.
"John Masey tells me that you are interested in the case of my poor friend,
sir. I am now going back to my house, and if you don't mind the trouble of
walking with me, I shall be happy to enlighten you as far as I am able."
I hastened to make my apologies and express my acknowledgments, and
we set off together. When we had reached the doctor's house and were seated
in his study, I ventured to inquire after the health of this poor gentleman.
"I am afraid there is no amendment, nor any prospect of amendment," said
the doctor. "Old Masey has told you something of his strange condition, has he
not?"
"Yes, he has told me something," I answered, "and he says you know all
about it."
Dr. Garden looked very grave. "I don't know all about it. I only know what
happens when he comes into the presence of a looking-glass. But as to the
circumstances which have led to his being haunted in the strangest fashion that
I ever heard of, I know no more of them than you do."
"Haunted?" I repeated. "And in the strangest fashion that you ever heard
of?"
Dr. Garden smiled at my eagerness, seemed to be collecting his thoughts,
and presently went on:
"I made the acquaintance of Mr. Oswald Strange in a curious way. It was
on board of an Italian steamer, bound from Civita Vecchia to Marseilles. We
had been travelling all night. In the morning I was shaving myself in the cabin,
when suddenly this man came behind me, glanced for a moment into the small
mirror before which I was standing, and then, without a word of warning, tore
it from the nail, and dashed it to pieces at my feet. His face was at first livid
with passion-it seemed to me rather the passion of fear than of anger-but it
changed after a moment, and he seemed ashamed of what he had done. Well,"
continued the doctor, relapsing for a moment into a smile, "of course I was in
a devil of a rage. I was operating on my under-jaw, and the start the thing gave
me caused me to cut myself. Besides, altogether it seemed an outrageous and
insolent thing, and I gave it to poor Strange in a style of language which I am
sorry to think of now, but which, I hope, was excusable at the time. As to the
offender himself, his confusion and regret, now that his passion was at an end,
disarmed me. He sent for the steward, and paid most liberally for the damage
done to the steam-boat property, explaining to him, and to some other
passengers who were present in the cabin, that what had happened had been

accidental. For me, however, he had another explanation. Perhaps he felt that I
must know it to have been no accident-perhaps he really wished to confide in
some one. At all events, he owned to me that what he had done was done
under the influence of an uncontrollable impulse-a seizure which took him,
he said, at times-something like a fit. He begged my pardon, and entreated
that I would endeavour to disassociate him personally from this action, of
which he was heartily ashamed. Then he attempted a sickly joke, poor fellow,
about his wearing a beard, and feeling a little spiteful, in consequence, when
he saw other people taking the trouble to shave; but he said nothing about any
infirmity or delusion, and shortly after left me.
"In my professional capacity I could not help taking some interest in Mr.
Strange. I did not altogether lose sight of him after our sea-journey to
Marseilles was over. I found him a pleasant companion up to a certain point;
but I always felt that there was a reserve about him. He was uncommunicative
about his past life, and especially would never allude to anything connected
with his travels or his residence in Italy, which, however, I could make out had
been a long one. He spoke Italian well, and seemed familiar with the country,
but disliked to talk about it.
"During the time we spent together there were seasons when he was so
little himself, that I, with a pretty large experience, was almost afraid to be
with him. His attacks were violent and sudden in the last degree; and there was
one most extraordinary feature connected with them all:-some horrible
association of ideas took possession of him whenever he found himself before
a looking-glass. And after we had travelled together for a time, I dreaded the
sight of a mirror hanging harmlessly against a wall, or a toilet-glass standing
on a dressing-table, almost as much as he did.
"Poor Strange was not always affected in the same manner by a lookingglass. Sometimes it seemed to madden him with fury; at other times, it
appeared to turn him to stone: remaining motionless and speechless as if
attacked by catalepsy. One night-the worst things always happen at night,
and oftener than one would think on stormy nights-we arrived at a small
town in the central district of Auvergne: a place but little known, out of the
line of railways, and to which we had been drawn, partly by the antiquarian
attractions which the place possessed, and partly by the beauty of the scenery.
The weather had been rather against us. The day had been dull and murky, the
heat stifling, and the sky had threatened mischief since the morning. At
sundown, these threats were fulfilled. The thunderstorm, which had been all
day coming up-as it seemed to us, against the wind-burst over the place
where we were lodged, with very great violence.
"There are some practical-minded persons with strong constitutions, who
deny roundly that their fellow-creatures are, or can be, affected, in mind or
body, by atmospheric influences. I am not a disciple of that school, simply
because I cannot believe that those changes of weather, which have so much

effect upon animals, and even on inanimate objects, can fail to have some
influence on a piece of machinery so sensitive and intricate as the human
frame. I think, then, that it was in part owing to the disturbed state of the
atmosphere that, on this particular evening I felt nervous and depressed. When
my new friend Strange and I parted for the night, I felt as little disposed to go
to rest as I ever did in my life. The thunder was still lingering among the
mountains in the midst of which our inn was placed. Sometimes it seemed
nearer, and at other times further off; but it never left off altogether, except for
a few minutes at a time. I was quite unable to shake off a succession of painful
ideas which persistently besieged my mind.
"It is hardly necessary to add that I thought from time to time of my
travelling-companion in the next room. His image was almost continually
before me. He had been dull and depressed all the evening, and when we
parted for the night there was a look in his eyes which I could not get out of
my memory.
"There was a door between our rooms, and the partition dividing them was
not very solid; and yet I had heard no sound since I parted from him which
could indicate that he was there at all, much less that he was awake and
stirring. I was in a mood, sir, which made this silence terrible to me, and so
many foolish fancies-as that he was lying there dead, or in a fit, or what not
-took possession of me, that at last I could bear it no longer. I went to the
door, and, after listening, very attentively but quite in vain, for any sound, I at
last knocked pretty sharply. There was no answer. Feeling that longer suspense
would be unendurable, I, without more ceremony, turned the handle and went
in.
"It was a great bare room, and so imperfectly lighted by a single candle
that it was almost impossible-except when the lightning flashed-to see into
its great dark corners. A small rickety bedstead stood against one of the walls,
shrouded by yellow cotton curtains, passed through a great iron ring in the
ceiling. There was, for all other furniture, an old chest of drawers which
served also as a washing-stand, having a small basin and ewer and a single
towel arranged on the top of it. There were, moreover, two ancient chairs and a
dressing-table. On this last, stood a large old-fashioned looking-glass with a
carved frame.
"I must have seen all these things, because I remember them so well now,
but I do not know how I could have seen them, for it seems to me that, from
the moment of my entering that room, the action of my senses and of the
faculties of my mind was held fast by the ghastly figure which stood
motionless before the looking-glass in the middle of the empty room.
"How terrible it was! The weak light of one candle standing on the table
shone upon Strange's face, lighting it from below, and throwing (as I now
remember) his shadow, vast and black, upon the wall behind him and upon the
ceiling overhead. He was leaning rather forward, with his hands upon the table

supporting him, and gazing into the glass which stood before him with a
horrible fixity. The sweat was on his white face; his rigid features and his pale
lips showed in that feeble light were horrible, more than words can tell, to look
at. He was so completely stupefied and lost, that the noise I had made in
knocking and in entering the room was unobserved by him. Not even when I
called him loudly by name did he move or did his face change.
"What a vision of horror that was, in the great dark empty room, in a
silence that was something more than negative, that ghastly figure frozen into
stone by some unexplained terror! And the silence and the stillness! The very
thunder had ceased now. My heart stood still with fear. Then, moved by some
instinctive feeling, under whose influence I acted mechanically, I crept with
slow steps nearer and nearer to the table, and at last, half expecting to see
some spectre even more horrible than this which I saw already, I looked over
his shoulder into the looking-glass. I happened to touch his arm, though only
in the lightest manner. In that one moment the spell which had held him-who
knows how long?-enchained, seemed broken, and he lived in this world
again. He turned round upon me, as suddenly as a tiger makes its spring, and
seized me by the arm.
"I have told you that even before I entered my friend's room I had felt, all
that night, depressed and nervous. The necessity for action at this time was,
however, so obvious, and this man's agony made all that I had felt, appear so
trifling, that much of my own discomfort seemed to leave me. I felt that I must
be strong.
"The face before me almost unmanned me. The eyes which looked into
mine were so scared with terror, the lips-if I may say so-looked so
speechless. The wretched man gazed long into my face, and then, still holding
me by the arm, slowly, very slowly, turned his head. I had gently tried to move
him away from the looking-glass, but he would not stir, and now he was
looking into it as fixedly as ever. I could bear this no longer, and, using such
force as was necessary, I drew him gradually away, and got him to one of the
chairs at the foot of the bed. 'Come!' I said-after the long silence my voice,
even to myself, sounded strange and hollow-'come! You are over-tired, and
you feel the weather. Don't you think you ought to be in bed? Suppose you lie
down. Let me try my medical skill in mixing you a composing draught.'
"He held my hand, and looked eagerly into my eyes. 'I am better now,' he
said, speaking at last very faintly. Still he looked at me in that wistful way. It
seemed as if there were something that he wanted to do or say, but had not
sufficient resolution. At length he got up from the chair to which I had led
him, and beckoning me to follow him, went across the room to the dressingtable, and stood again before the glass. A violent shudder passed through his
frame as he looked into it; but apparently forcing himself to go through with
what he had now begun, he remained where he was, and, without looking
away, moved to me with his hand to come and stand beside him. I complied.

"'Look in there!' he said, in an almost inaudible tone. He was supported,
as before, by his hands resting on the table, and could only bow with his head
towards the glass to intimate what he meant. 'Look in there!' he repeated.
"I did as he asked me.
"'What do you see?' he asked next.
"'See?' I repeated, trying to speak as cheerfully as I could, and describing
the reflexion of his own face as nearly as I could. 'I see a very, very pale face
with sunken cheeks-'
"'What?' he cried, with an alarm in his voice which I could not understand.
"'With sunken cheeks,' I went on, 'and two hollow eyes with large pupils.'
"I saw the reflexion of my friend's face change, and felt his hand clutch
my arm even more tightly than he had done before. I stopped abruptly and
looked round at him. He did not turn his head towards me, but, gazing still into
the looking-glass, seemed to labour for utterance.
"'What,' he stammered at last. 'Do you-see it-too?'
"'See what?' I asked, quickly.
"'That face!' he cried, in accents of horror. 'That face-which is not mine
-and which-I see instead of mine-always!'
"I was struck speechless by the words. In a moment this mystery was
explained-but what an explanation! Worse, a hundred times worse, than
anything I had imagined. What! Had this man lost the power of seeing his own
image as it was reflected there before him? and, in its place, was there the
image of another? Had he changed reflexions with some other man? The
frightfulness of the thought struck me speechless for a time-then I saw how
false an impression my silence was conveying.
"'No, no, no!' I cried, as soon as I could speak-'a hundred times, no! I
see you, of course, and only you. It was your face I attempted to describe, and
no other.'
"He seemed not to hear me. 'Why, look there!' he said, in a low, indistinct
voice, pointing to his own image in the glass. 'Whose face do you see there?'
"'Why yours, of course.' And then, after a moment, I added, 'Whose do
you see?'
"He answered, like one in a trance, 'His-only his-always his!' He stood
still a moment, and then, with a loud and terrific scream, repeated those words,
'Always his, always his,' and fell down in a fit before me.
"I knew what to do now. Here was a thing which, at any rate, I could
understand. I had with me my usual small stock of medicines and surgical
instruments, and I did what was necessary: first to restore my unhappy patient,
and next to procure for him the rest he needed so much. He was very ill-at

death's door for some days-and I could not leave him, though there was
urgent need that I should be back in London. When he began to mend, I sent
over to England for my servant-John Masey-whom I knew I could trust.
Acquainting him with the outlines of the case, I left him in charge of my
patient, with orders that he should be brought over to this country as soon as
he was fit to travel.
"That awful scene was always before me. I saw this devoted man day after
day, with the eyes of my imagination, sometimes destroying in his rage the
harmless looking-glass, which was the immediate cause of his suffering,
sometimes transfixed before the horrid image that turned him to stone. I
recollect coming upon him once when we were stopping at a roadside inn, and
seeing him stand so by broad daylight. His back was turned towards me, and I
waited and watched him for nearly half an hour as he stood there motionless
and speechless, and appearing not to breathe. I am not sure but that this
apparition seen so by daylight was more ghastly than that apparition seen in
the middle of the night, with the thunder rumbling among the hills.
"Back in London in his own house, where he could command in some sort
the objects which should surround him, poor Strange was better than he would
have been elsewhere. He seldom went out except at night, but once or twice I
have walked with him by daylight, and have seen him terribly agitated when
we have had to pass a shop in which looking-glasses were exposed for sale.
"It is nearly a year now since my poor friend followed me down to this
place, to which I have retired. For some months he has been daily getting
weaker and weaker, and a disease of the lungs has become developed in him,
which has brought him to his death-bed. I should add, by-the-by, that John
Masey has been his constant companion ever since I brought them together,
and I have had, consequently, to look after a new servant.
"And now tell me," the doctor added, bringing his tale to an end, "did you
ever hear a more miserable history, or was ever man haunted in a more ghastly
manner than this man?"
I was about to reply when I heard a sound of footsteps outside, and before
I could speak old Masey entered the room, in haste and disorder.
"I was just telling this gentleman," the doctor said: not at the moment
observing old Masey's changed manner: "how you deserted me to go over to
your present master."
"Ah! sir," the man answered, in a troubled voice, "I'm afraid he won't be
my master long."
The doctor was on his legs in a moment. "What! Is he worse?"
"I think, sir, he is dying," said the old man.
"Come with me, sir; you may be of use if you can keep quiet." The doctor
caught up his hat as he addressed me in those words, and in a few minutes we

had reached The Compensation House. A few seconds more, and we were
standing in a darkened room on the first floor, and I saw lying on a bed before
me-pale, emaciated, and, as it seemed, dying-the man whose story I had
just heard.
He was lying with closed eyes when we came into the room, and I had
leisure to examine his features. What a tale of misery they told! They were
regular and symmetrical in their arrangement, and not without beauty-the
beauty of exceeding refinement and delicacy. Force there was none, and
perhaps it was to the want of this that the faults-perhaps the crime-which
had made the man's life so miserable were to be attributed. Perhaps the crime?
Yes, it was not likely that an affliction, lifelong and terrible, such as this he
had endured, would come upon him unless some misdeed had provoked the
punishment. What misdeed we were soon to know.
It sometimes-I think generally-happens that the presence of any one
who stands and watches beside a sleeping man will wake him, unless his
slumbers are unusually heavy. It was so now. While we looked at him, the
sleeper awoke very suddenly, and fixed his eyes upon us. He put out his hand
and took the doctor's in its feeble grasp. "Who is that?" he asked next,
pointing towards me.
"Do you wish him to go? The gentleman knows something of your
sufferings, and is powerfully interested in your case; but he will leave us, if
you wish it," the doctor said.
"No. Let him stay."
Seating myself out of sight, but where I could both see and hear what
passed, I waited for what should follow. Dr. Garden and John Masey stood
beside the bed. There was a moment's pause.
"I want a looking-glass," said Strange, without a word of preface.
We all started to hear him say those words. "I am dying," said Strange;
"will you not grant me my request?"
Doctor Garden whispered to old Masey; and the latter left the room. He
was not absent long, having gone no further than the next house. He held an
oval-framed mirror in his hand when he returned. A shudder passed through
the body of the sick man as he saw it.
"Put it down," he said, faintly-"anywhere-for the present."
No one of us spoke. I do not think, in that moment of suspense, that we
could, any of us, have spoken if we had tried.
The sick man tried to raise himself a little. "Prop me up," he said. "I speak
with difficulty-I have something to say."
They put pillows behind him, so as to raise his head and body.
"I have presently a use for it," he said, indicating the mirror. "I want to see

-" He stopped, and seemed to change his mind. He was sparing of his words.
"I want to tell you-all about it." Again he was silent. Then he seemed to
make a great effort and spoke once more, beginning very abruptly.
"I loved my wife fondly. I loved her-her name was Lucy. She was
English; but, after we were married, we lived long abroad-in Italy. She liked
the country, and I liked what she liked. She liked to draw, too, and I got her a
master. He was an Italian. I will not give his name. We always called him 'the
Master.' A treacherous insidious man this was, and, under cover of his
profession, took advantage of his opportunities, and taught my wife to love
him-to love him.
"I am short of breath. I need not enter into details as to how I found them
out; but I did find them out. We were away on a sketching expedition when I
made my discovery. My rage maddened me, and there was one at hand who
fomented my madness. My wife had a maid, who, it seemed, had also loved
this man-the Master-and had been ill treated and deserted by him. She told
me all. She had played the part of go-between-had carried letters. When she
told me these things, it was night, in a solitary Italian town, among the
mountains. 'He is in his room now,' she said, 'writing to her.'
"A frenzy took possession of me as I listened to those words. I am
naturally vindictive-remember that-and now my longing for revenge was
like a thirst. Travelling in those lonely regions, I was armed, and when the
woman said, 'He is writing to your wife,' I laid hold of my pistols, as by an
instinct. It has been some comfort to me since, that I took them both. Perhaps,
at that moment, I may have meant fairly by him-meant that we should fight. I
don't know what I meant, quite. The woman's words, 'He is in his own room
now, writing to her,' rung in my ears."
The sick man stopped to take breath. It seemed an hour, though it was
probably not more than two minutes, before he spoke again.
"I managed to get into his room unobserved. Indeed, he was altogether
absorbed in what he was doing. He was sitting at the only table in the room,
writing at a travelling-desk, by the light of a single candle. It was a rude
dressing-table, and-and before him-exactly before him-there was-there
was a looking-glass.
"I stole up behind him as he sat and wrote by the light of the candle. I
looked over his shoulder at the letter, and I read, 'Dearest Lucy, my love, my
darling.' As I read the words, I pulled the trigger of the pistol I held in my
right hand, and killed him-killed him-but, before he died, he looked up
once-not at me, but at my image before him in the glass, and his face-such
a face-has been there-ever since, and mine-my face-is gone!"
He fell back exhausted, and we all pressed forward thinking that he must
be dead, he lay so still.
But he had not yet passed away. He revived under the influence of

stimulants. He tried to speak, and muttered indistinctly from time to time
words of which we could sometimes make no sense. We understood, however,
that he had been tried by an Italian tribunal, and had been found guilty; but
with such extenuating circumstances that his sentence was commuted to
imprisonment, during, we thought we made out, two years. But we could not
understand what he said about his wife, though we gathered that she was still
alive, from something he whispered to the doctor of there being provision
made for her in his will.
He lay in a doze for something more than an hour after he had told his tale,
and then he woke up quite suddenly, as he had done when we had first entered
the room. He looked round uneasily in all directions, until his eye fell on the
looking-glass.
"I want it," he said, hastily; but I noticed that he did not shudder now, as it
was brought near. When old Masey approached, holding it in his hand, and
crying like a child, Dr. Garden came forward and stood between him and his
master, taking the hand of poor Strange in his.
"Is this wise?" he asked. "Is it good, do you think, to revive this misery of
your life now, when it is so near its close? The chastisement of your crime," he
added, solemnly, "has been a terrible one. Let us hope in God's mercy that
your punishment is over."
The dying man raised himself with a last great effort, and looked up at the
doctor with such an expression on his face as none of us had seen on any face,
before.
"I do hope so," he said, faintly, "but you must let me have my way in this
-for if, now, when I look, I see aright-once more-I shall then hope yet
more strongly-for I shall take it as a sign."
The doctor stood aside without another word, when he heard the dying
man speak thus, and the old servant drew near, and, stooping over softly, held
the looking-glass before his master. Presently afterwards, we, who stood
around looking breathlessly at him, saw such a rapture upon his face, as left no
doubt upon our minds that the face which had haunted him so long, had, in his
last hour, disappeared.

No. 4 BRANCH LINE
THE TRAVELLING POST-OFFICE

Many years ago, and before this Line was so much as projected, I was
engaged as a clerk in a Travelling Post-office running along the Line of
railway from London to a town in the Midland Counties, which we will call
Fazeley. My duties were to accompany the mail-train which left Fazeley at
8.15 p.m., and arrived in London about midnight, and to return by the day mail
leaving London at 10.30 the following morning, after which I had an unbroken
night at Fazeley, while another clerk discharged the same round of work; and
in this way each alternative evening I was on duty in the railway post-office
van. At first I suffered a little from a hurry and tremor of nerve in pursuing my
occupation while the train was crashing along under bridges and through
tunnels at a speed which was then thought marvellous and perilous; but it was
not long before my hands and eyes became accustomed to the motion of the
carriage, and I could go through my business with the same despatch and ease
as in the post-office of the country town where I had learned it, and from
which I had been promoted by the influence of the surveyor of the district, Mr.
Huntingdon. In fact, the work soon fell into a monotonous routine, which,
night after night, was pursued in an unbroken course by myself and the junior
clerk, who was my only assistant: the railway post-office work not having then
attained the importance and magnitude it now possesses.
Our route lay through an agricultural district containing many small towns,
which made up two or three bags only; one for London; another perhaps for
the county town; a third for the railway post-office, to be opened by us, and
the enclosures to be distributed according to their various addresses. The
clerks in many of these small offices were women, as is very generally the
case still, being the daughters and female relatives of the nominal postmaster,
who transact most of the business of the office, and whose names are most
frequently signed upon the bills accompanying the bags. I was a young man,
and somewhat more curious in feminine handwriting than I am now. There
was one family in particular, whom I had never seen, but with whose
signatures I was perfectly familiar-clear, delicate, and educated, very unlike
the miserable scrawl upon other letter-bills. One New Year's-eve, in a moment
of sentiment, I tied a slip of paper among a bundle of letters for their office,
upon which I had written, "A happy New Year to you all." The next evening
brought me a return of my good wishes, signed, as I guessed, by three sisters
of the name of Clifton. From that day, every now and then, a sentence or two
as brief as the one above passed between us, and the feeling of acquaintance
and friendship grew upon me, though I had never yet had an opportunity of
seeing my fair unknown friends.
It was towards the close of the following October that it came under my
notice that the then Premier of the ministry was paying an autumn visit to a
nobleman, whose country seat was situated near a small village on our line of
rail. The Premier's despatch-box, containing, of course, all the despatches
which it was necessary to send down to him, passed between him and the

Secretary of State, and was, as usual, entrusted to the care of the post-office.
The Continent was just then in a more than ordinarily critical state; we were
thought to be upon the verge of an European war; and there were murmurs
floating about, at the dispersion of the ministry up and down the country.
These circumstances made the charge of the despatch-box the more interesting
to me. It was very similar in size and shape to the old-fashioned workboxes
used by ladies before boxes of polished and ornamental wood came into
vogue, and, like them, it was covered with red morocco leather, and it fastened
with a lock and key. The first time it came into my hands I took such special
notice of it as might be expected. Upon one corner of the lid I detected a
peculiar device scratched slightly upon it, most probably with the sharp point
of a steel pen, in such a moment of preoccupation of mind as causes most of
us to draw odd lines and caricatured faces upon any piece of paper which may
lie under our hand. It was the old revolutionary device of a heart with a dagger
piercing it; and I wondered whether it could be the Premier, or one of his
secretaries, who had traced it upon the morocco.
This box had been travelling up and down for about ten days, and, as the
village did not make up a bag for London, there being very few letters
excepting those from the great house, the letter-bag from the house, and the
despatch-box, were handed direct into our travelling post-office. But in
compliment to the presence of the Premier in the neighbourhood, the train,
instead of slackening speed only, stopped altogether, in order that the
Premier's trusty and confidential messenger might deliver the important box
into my own hands, that its perfect safety might be ensured. I had an undefined
suspicion that some person was also employed to accompany the train up to
London, for three or four times I had met with a foreign-looking gentleman at
Euston-square, standing at the door of the carriage nearest the post-office van,
and eyeing the heavy bags as they were transferred from my care to the
custody of the officials from the General Post-office. But though I felt amused
and somewhat nettled at this needless precaution, I took no further notice of
the man, except to observe that he had the swarthy aspect of a foreigner, and
that he kept his face well away from the light of the lamps. Except for these
things, and after the first time or two, the Premier's despatch-box interested
me no more than any other part of my charge. My work had been doubly
monotonous for some time past, and I began to think it time to get up some
little entertainment with my unknown friends, the Cliftons. I was just thinking
of it as the train stopped at the station about a mile from the town where they
lived, and their postman, a gruff matter-of-fact fellow-you could see it in
every line of his face-put in the letter-bags, and with them a letter addressed
to me. It was in an official envelope, "On Her Majesty's Service," and the seal
was an official seal. On the folded paper inside it (folded officially also) I read
the following order: "Mr. Wilcox is requested to permit the bearer, the
daughter of the postmaster at Eaton, to see the working of the railway postoffice during the up-journey." The writing I knew well as being that of one of

the surveyor's clerks, and the signature was Mr. Huntingdon's. The bearer of
the order presented herself at the door, the snorting of the engine gave notice
of the instant departure of the train, I held out my hand, the young lady sprang
lightly and deftly into the van, and we were off again on our midnight journey.
She was a small slight creature, one of those slender little girls one never
thinks of as being a woman, dressed neatly and plainly in a dark dress, with a
veil hanging a little over her face and tied under her chin: the most noticeable
thing about her appearance being a great mass of light hair, almost yellow,
which had got loose in some way, and fell down her neck in thick wavy
tresses. She had a free pleasant way about her, not in the least bold or forward,
which in a minute or two made her presence seem the most natural thing in the
world. As she stood beside me before the row of boxes into which I was
sorting my letters, she asked questions and I answered as if it were quite an
every-day occurrence for us to be travelling up together in the night mail to
Euston-square station. I blamed myself for an idiot that I had not sooner made
an opportunity for visiting my unknown friends at Eaton.
"Then," I said, putting down the letter-bill from their own office before
her, "may I ask which of the signatures I know so well, is yours? Is it A.
Clifton, or M. Clifton, or S. Clifton?" She hesitated a little, and blushed, and
lifted up her frank childlike eyes to mine.
"I am A. Clifton," she answered.
"And your name?" I said.
"Anne;" then, as if anxious to give some explanation to me of her present
position, she added, "I was going up to London on a visit, and I thought it
would be so nice to travel in the post-office to see how the work was done,
and Mr. Huntingdon came to survey our office, and he said he would send me
an order."
I felt somewhat surprised, for a stricter martinet than Mr. Huntingdon did
not breathe; but I glanced down at the small innocent face at my side, and
cordially approved of his departure from ordinary rules.
"Did you know you would travel with me?" I asked, in a lower voice; for
Tom Morville, my junior, was at my other elbow.
"I knew I should travel with Mr. Wilcox," she answered, with a smile that
made all my nerves tingle.
"You have not written me a word for ages," said I, reproachfully.
"You had better not talk, or you'll be making mistakes," she replied, in an
arch tone. It was quite true; for, a sudden confusion coming over me, I was
sorting the letters at random.
We were just then approaching the small station where the letter-bag from
the great house was taken up. The engine was slackening speed. Miss Clifton
manifested some natural and becoming diffidence.

"It would look so odd," she said, "to any one on the platform, to see a girl
in the post-office van! And they couldn't know I was a postmaster's daughter,
and had an order from Mr. Huntingdon. Is there no dark corner to shelter me?"
I must explain to you in a word or two the construction of the van, which
was much less efficiently fitted up than the travelling post-offices of the
present day. It was a reversible van, with a door at each right-hand corner. At
each door the letter-boxes were so arranged as to form a kind of screen about
two feet in width, which prevented people from seeing all over the carriage at
once. Thus the door at the far end of the van, the one not in use at the time,
was thrown into deep shadow, and the screen before it turned it into a small
niche, where a slight little person like Miss Clifton was very well concealed
from curious eyes. Before the train came within the light from the lamps on
the platform, she ensconced herself in this shelter. No one but I could see her
laughing face, as she stood there leaning cautiously forward with her finger
pressed upon her rosy lips, peeping at the messenger who delivered into my
own hands the Premier's despatch-box, while Tom Morville received the
letter-bag of the great house.
"See," I said, when we were again in motion, and she had emerged from
her concealment, "this is the Premier's despatch-box, going back to the
Secretary of State. There are some state secrets for you, and ladies are fond of
secrets."
"Oh! I know nothing about politics," she answered, indifferently, "and we
have had that box through our office a time or two."
"Did you ever notice this mark upon it," I asked-"a heart with a dagger
through it?" and bending down my face to hers, I added a certain spooney
remark, which I do not care to repeat. Miss Clifton tossed her little head, and
pouted her lips; but she took the box out of my hands, and carried it to the
lamp nearest the further end of the van, after which she put it down upon the
counter close beside the screen, and I thought no more about it. The midnight
ride was entertaining in the extreme, for the girl was full of young life and
sauciness and merry humour. I can safely aver that I have never been to an
evening's so-called entertainment which, to me, was half so enjoyable. It
added also to the zest and keen edge of the enjoyment to see her hasten to hide
herself whenever I told her we were going to stop to take up the mails.
"We had passed Watford, the last station at which we stopped, before I
became alive to the recollection that our work was terribly behindhand. Miss
Clifton also became grave, and sat at the end of the counter very quiet and
subdued, as if her frolic were over, and it was possible she might find
something to repent of in it. I had told her we should stop no more until we
reached Euston-square station, but to my surprise I felt our speed decreasing,
and our train coming to a standstill. I looked out and called to the guard in the
van behind, who told me he supposed there was something on the line before

us, and that we should go on in a minute or two. I turned my head, and gave
this information to my fellow-clerk and Miss Clifton.
"Do you know where we are?" she asked, in a frightened tone.
"At Camden-town," I replied. She sprang hastily from her seat, and came
towards me.
"I am close to my friend's house here," she said, "so it is a lucky thing for
me. It is not five minutes' walk from the station. I will say good-bye to you
now, Mr. Wilcox, and I thank you a thousand times for your kindness."
She seemed flurried, and she held out both her little hands to me in an
appealing kind of way, as if she were afraid of my detaining her against her
will. I took them both into mine, pressing them with rather more ardour than
was quite necessary.
"I do not like you to go alone at this hour," I said, "but there is no help for
it. It has been a delightful time to me. Will you allow me to call upon you tomorrow morning early, for I leave London at 10.30; or on Wednesday, when I
shall be in town again?"
"O," she answered, hanging her head, "I don't know. I'll write and tell
mamma how kind you have been, and, and-but I must go, Mr. Wilcox."
"I don't like your going alone," I repeated.
"O! I know the way perfectly," she said, in the same flurried manner,
"perfectly, thank you. And it is close at hand. Goodbye."
She jumped lightly out of the carriage, and the train started on again at the
same instant. We were busy enough, as you may suppose. In five minutes
more we should be in Euston-square, and there was nearly fifteen minutes
work still to be done. Spite of the enjoyment he had afforded me, I mentally
anathematised Mr. Huntingdon and his departure from ordinary rules, and,
thrusting Miss Clifton forcibly out of my thoughts, I set to work with a will,
gathered up the registered letters for London, tied them into a bundle with the
paper bill, and then turned to the corner of the counter for the despatch-box.
You have guessed already my cursed misfortune. The Premier's despatchbox was not there. For the first minute or so I was in nowise alarmed, and
merely looked round, upon the floor, under the bags, into the boxes, into any
place into which it could have fallen or been deposited. We reached Eustonsquare while I was still searching, and losing more and more of my composure
every instant. Tom Morville joined me in my quest, and felt every bag which
had been made up and sealed. The box was no small article which could go
into little compass; it was certainly twelve inches long, and more than that in
girth. But it turned up nowhere. I never felt nearer fainting than at that
moment.
"Could Miss Clifton have carried it off?" suggested Tom Morville.

"No," I said, indignantly but thoughtfully, "she couldn't have carried off
such a bulky thing as that, without our seeing it. It would not go into one of
our pockets, Tom, and she wore a tight-fitting jacket that would not conceal
anything."
"No, she can't have it," assented Tom; "then it must be somewhere about."
We searched again and again, turning over everything in the van, but without
success. The Premier's despatch-box was gone; and all we could do at first
was to stand and stare at one another. Our trance of blank dismay was of short
duration, for the van was assailed by the postmen from St. Martin's-le-Grand,
who were waiting for our charge. In a stupor of bewilderment we completed
our work, and delivered up the mails; then, once more we confronted one
another with pale faces, frightened out of our seven senses. All the scrapes we
had ever been in (and we had had our usual share of errors and blunders) faded
into utter insignificance compared with this. My eye fell upon Mr.
Huntingdon's order lying among some scraps of waste paper on the floor, and
I picked it up, and put it carefully, with its official envelope, into my pocket.
"We can't stay here," said Tom. The porters were looking in inquisitively;
we were seldom so long in quitting oar empty van.
"No," I replied, a sudden gleam of sense darting across the blank
bewilderment of my brain; "no, we must go to head-quarters at once, and
make a clean breast of it. This is no private business, Tom."
We made one more ineffectual search, and then we hailed a cab and drove
as hard as we could to the General Post-office. The secretary of the Post-office
was not there, of course, but we obtained the address of his residence in one of
the suburbs, four or five miles from the City, and we told no one of our
misfortune, my idea being that the fewer who were made acquainted with the
loss the better. My judgment was in the right there.
We had to knock up the household of the secretary-a formidable
personage with whom I had never been brought into contact before-and in a
short time we were holding a strictly private and confidential interview with
him, by the glimmer of a solitary candle, just serving to light up his severe
face, which changed its expression several times as I narrated the calamity. It
was too stupendous for rebuke, and I fancied his eyes softened with something
like commiseration as he gazed upon us. After a short interval of deliberation,
he announced his intention of accompanying us to the residence of the
Secretary of State; and in a few minutes we were driving back again to the
opposite extremity of London. It was not far off the hour for the morning
delivery of letters when we reached our destination; but the atmosphere was
yellow with fog, and we could see nothing as we passed along in almost utter
silence, for neither of us ventured to speak, and the secretary only made a brief
remark now and then. We drove up to some dwelling enveloped in fog, and we
were left in the cab for nearly half an hour, while our secretary went in. At the
end of that time we were summoned to an apartment where there was seated at

a large desk a small spare man, with a great head, and eyes deeply sunk under
the brows. There was no form of introduction, of course, and we could only
guess who he might be; but we were requested to repeat our statement, and a
few shrewd questions were put to us by the stranger. We were eager to put him
in possession of everything we knew, but that was little beyond the fact that
the despatch-box was lost.
"That young person must have taken it," he said.
"She could not, sir," I answered, positively, but deferentially. "She wore
the tightest-fitting pelisse I ever saw, and she gave me both her hands when
she said good-bye. She could not possibly have it concealed about her. It
would not go into my pocket."
"How did she come to travel up with you in the van, sir?" he asked
severely.
I gave him for answer the order signed by Mr. Huntingdon. He and our
secretary scanned it closely.
"It is Huntingdon's signature without doubt," said the latter; "I could swear
to it anywhere. This is an extraordinary circumstance!"
It was an extraordinary circumstance. The two retired into an adjoining
room, where they stayed for another half-hour, and when they returned to us
their faces still bore an aspect of grave perplexity.
"Mr. Wilcox and Mr. Morville," said our secretary, "it is expedient that this
affair should be kept inviolably secret. You must even be careful not to hint
that you hold any secret. You did well not to announce your loss at the Postoffice, and I shall cause it to be understood that you had instructions to take
the despatch-box direct to its destination. Your business now is to find the
young woman, and return with her not later than six o'clock this afternoon to
my office at the General Post-office. What other steps we think it requisite to
take, you need know nothing about; the less you know, the better for
yourselves."
Another gleam of commiseration in his official eye made our hearts sink
within us. We departed promptly, and, with that instinct of wisdom which at
times dictates infallibly what course we should pursue, we decided our line of
action. Tom Morville was to go down to Camden-town, and inquire at every
house for Miss Clifton, while I-there would be just time for it-was to run
down to Eaton by train and obtain her exact address from her parents. We
agreed to meet at the General Post-office at half-past five, if I could possibly
reach it by that time; but in any case Tom was to report himself to the
secretary and account for my absence.
When I arrived at the station at Eaton, I found that I had only forty-five
minutes before the up train went by. The town was nearly a mile away, but I
made all the haste I could to reach it. I was not surprised to find the post-office

in connexion with a bookseller's shop, and I saw a pleasant elderly lady seated
behind the counter, while a tall dark-haired girl was sitting at some work a
little out of sight. I introduced myself at once.
"I am Frank Wilcox, of the railway post-office, and I have just run down to
Eaton to obtain some information from you."
"Certainly. We know you well by name," was the reply, given in a cordial
manner, which was particularly pleasant to me.
"Will you be so good as give me the address of Miss Anne Clifton in
Camden-town?" I said.
"Miss Anne Clifton?" ejaculated the lady.
"Yes. Your daughter, I presume. Who went up to London last night."
"I have no daughter Anne," she said; "I am Anne Clifton, and my
daughters are named Mary and Susan. This is my daughter Mary."
The tall dark-haired girl had left her seat, and now stood beside her
mother. Certainly she was very unlike the small golden-haired coquette who
had travelled up to London with me as Anne Clifton.
"Madam," I said, scarcely able to speak, "is your other daughter a slender
little creature, exactly the reverse of this young lady?"
"No," she answered, laughing; "Susan is both taller and darker than Mary.
Call Susan, my dear."
In a few seconds Miss Susan made her appearance, and I had the three
before me-A. Clifton, S. Clifton, and M. Clifton. There was no other girl in
the family; and when I described the young lady who had travelled under their
name, they could not think of any one in the town-it was a small one-who
answered my description, or who had gone on a visit to London. I had no time
to spare, and I hurried back to the station, just catching the train as it left the
platform. At the appointed hour I met Morville at the General Post-office, and
threading the long passages of the secretary's offices, we at length found
ourselves anxiously waiting in an ante-room, until we were called into his
presence. Morville had discovered nothing, except that the porters and
policemen at Camden-town station had seen a young lady pass out last night,
attended by a swarthy man who looked like a foreigner, and carried a small
black portmanteau.
I scarcely know how long we waited; it might have been years, for I was
conscious of an ever-increasing difficulty in commanding my thoughts, or
fixing them upon the subject which had engrossed them all day. I had not
tasted food for twenty-four hours, nor closed my eyes for thirty-six, while,
during the whole of the time, my nervous system had been on full strain.
Presently, the summons came, and I was ushered, first, into the inner
apartment. There sat five gentlemen round a table, which was strewed with a

number of documents. There were the Secretary of State, whom we had seen
in the morning, our secretary, and Mr. Huntingdon; the fourth was a finelooking man, whom I afterwards knew to be the Premier; the fifth I recognised
as our great chief, the Postmaster-General. It was an august assemblage to me,
and I bowed low; but my head was dizzy, and my throat parched.
"Mr. Wilcox," said our secretary, "you will tell these gentlemen again, the
circumstances of the loss you reported to me this morning."
I laid my hand upon the back of a chair to steady myself, and went through
the narration for the third time, passing over sundry remarks made by myself
to the young lady. That done, I added the account of my expedition to Eaton,
and the certainty at which I had arrived that my fellow-traveller was not the
person she represented herself to be. After which, I inquired with
indescribable anxiety if Mr. Huntingdon's order were a forgery?
"I cannot tell, Mr. Wilcox," said that gentleman, taking the order into his
hands, and regarding it with an air of extreme perplexity. "I could have sworn
it was mine, had it been attached to any other document. I think Forbes's
handwriting is not so well imitated. But it is the very ink I use, and mine is a
peculiar signature."
It was a very peculiar and old-fashioned signature, with a flourish
underneath it not unlike a whip-handle, with the lash caught round it in the
middle; but that did not make it the more difficult to forge, as I humbly
suggested. Mr. Huntingdon wrote his name upon a paper, and two or three of
the gentlemen tried to imitate the flourish, but vainly. They gave it up with a
smile upon their grave faces.
"You have been careful not to let a hint of this matter drop from you, Mr.
Wilcox?" said the Postmaster-General.
"Not a syllable, my lord," I answered.
"It is imperatively necessary that the secret should be kept. You would be
removed from the temptation of telling it, if you had an appointment in some
office abroad. The packet-agency at Alexandria is vacant, and I will have you
appointed to it at once."
It would be a good advance from my present situation, and would
doubtless prove a stepping-stone to other and better appointments; but I had a
mother living at Fazeley, bedridden and paralytic, who had no pleasure in
existence except having me to dwell under the same roof with her. My head
was growing more and more dizzy, and a strange vagueness was creeping over
me.
"Gentlemen," I muttered, "I have a bedridden mother whom I cannot
leave. I was not to blame, gentlemen." I fancied there was a stir and movement
at the table, but my eyes were dim, and in another second I had lost
consciousness.

When I came to myself, in two or three minutes, I found that Mr.
Huntingdon was kneeling on the floor beside me, supporting my head, while
our secretary held a glass of wine to my lips. I rallied as quickly as possible,
and staggered to my feet; but the two gentlemen placed me in the chair against
which I had been leaning, and insisted upon my finishing the wine before I
tried to speak.
"I have not tasted food all day," I said, faintly.
"Then, my good fellow, you shall go home immediately," said the
Postmaster-General; "but be on your guard! Not a word of this must escape
you. Are you a married man?"
"No, my lord," I answered.
"So much the better," he added, smiling. "You can keep a secret from your
mother, I dare say. We rely upon your honour."
The secretary then rang a bell, and I was committed to the charge of the
messenger who answered it; and in a few minutes I was being conveyed in a
cab to my London lodgings. A week afterwards, Tom Morville was sent out to
a post-office in Canada, where he settled down, married, and is still living,
perfectly satisfied with his position, as he occasionally informs me by letter.
For myself, I remained as I desired, in my old post as travelling-clerk until the
death of my mother, which occurred some ten or twelve months afterwards. I
was then promoted to an appointment as a clerk in charge, upon the first
vacancy.
The business of the clerks in charge is to take possession of any post-office
in the kingdom, upon the death or resignation of the postmaster, or when
circumstances of suspicion cause his suspension from office. My new duties
carried me three or four times into Mr. Huntingdon's district. Though that
gentleman and I never exchanged a word with regard to the mysterious loss in
which we had both had an innocent share, he distinguished me with peculiar
favour, and more than once invited me to visit him at his own house. He lived
alone, having but one daughter, who had married, somewhat against his will,
one of his clerks: the Mr. Forbes whose handwriting had been so successfully
imitated in the official order presented to me by the self-styled Miss Anne
Clifton. (By the way, I may here mention, though it has nothing to do with my
story, that my acquaintance with the Cliftons had ripened into an intimacy,
which resulted in my engagement and marriage to Mary.)
It would be beside my purpose to specify the precise number of years
which elapsed before I was once again summoned to the secretary's private
apartment, where I found him closeted with Mr. Huntingdon. Mr. Huntingdon
shook hands with unofficial cordiality; and then the secretary proceeded to
state the business on hand.
"Mr. Wilcox, you remember our offer to place you in office in
Alexandria?" he said.

"Certainly, sir," I answered.
"It has been a troublesome office," he continued, almost pettishly. "We
sent out Mr. Forbes only six months ago, on account of his health, which
required a warmer climate, and now his medical man reports that his life is not
worth three weeks' purchase."
Upon Mr. Huntingdon's face there rested an expression of profound
anxiety; and as the secretary paused he addressed himself to me.
"Mr. Wilcox," he said, "I have been soliciting, as a personal favour, that
you should be sent out to take charge of the packet-agency, in order that my
daughter may have some one at hand to befriend her, and manage her business
affairs for her. You are not personally acquainted with her, but I know I can
trust her with you."
"You may, Mr. Huntingdon," I said, warmly. "I will do anything I can to
aid Mrs. Forbes. When do you wish me to start?"
"How soon can you be ready?" was the rejoinder.
"To-morrow morning."
I was not married then, and I anticipated no delay in setting off. Nor was
there any. I travelled with the overland mail through France to Marseilles,
embarked in a vessel for Alexandria, and in a few days from the time I first
heard of my destination set foot in the office there. All the postal arrangements
had fallen into considerable irregularity and confusion; for, as I was informed
immediately on my arrival, Mr. Forbes had been in a dying condition for the
last week, and of course the absence of a master had borne the usual results. I
took formal possession of the office, and then, conducted by one of the clerks,
I proceeded to the dwelling of the unfortunate postmaster and his no less
unfortunate wife. It would be out of place in this narrative to indulge in any
traveller's tales about the strange place where I was so unexpectedly located.
Suffice it to say, that the darkened sultry room into which I was shown, on
inquiring for Mrs. Forbes, was bare of furniture, and destitute of all those little
tokens of refinement and taste which make our English parlours so pleasant to
the eye. There was, however, a piano in one of the dark corners of the room,
open, and with a sheet of music on it. While I waited for Mrs. Forbes's
appearance, I strolled idly up to the piano to see what music it might be. The
next moment my eye fell upon an antique red morocco workbox standing on
the top of the piano-a workbox evidently, for the lid was not closely shut,
and a few threads of silk and cotton were hanging out of it. In a kind of dream
-for it was difficult to believe that the occurrence was a fact-I carried the
box to the darkened window, and there, plain in my sight, was the device
scratched upon the leather: the revolutionary symbol of a heart with a dagger
through it. I had found the Premier's despatch-box in the parlour of the packetagent of Alexandria!
I stood for some minutes with that dream-like feeling upon me, gazing at

the box in the dim obscure light. It could not be real! My fancy must be
playing a trick upon me! But the sound of a light step-for, light as it was, I
heard it distinctly as it approached the room-broke my trance, and I hastened
to replace the box on the piano, and to stoop down as if examining the music
before the door opened. I had not sent in my name to Mrs. Forbes, for I did not
suppose that she was acquainted with it, nor could she see me distinctly, as I
stood in the gloom. But I could see her. She had the slight slender figure, the
childlike face, and the fair hair of Miss Anne Clifton. She came quickly across
the room, holding out both her hands in a childish appealing manner.
"O!" she wailed, in a tone that went straight to my heart, "he is dead! He
has just died!"
It was no time then to speak about the red morocco workbox. This little
childish creature, who did not look a day older than when I had last seen her in
my travelling post-office, was a widow in a strange land, far away from any
friend save myself. I had brought her a letter from her father. The first duties
that devolved upon me were those of her husband's interment, which had to
take place immediately. Three or four weeks elapsed before I could, with any
humanity, enter upon the investigation of her mysterious complicity in the
daring theft practised on the government and the post-office.
I did not see the despatch-box again. In the midst of her new and vehement
grief, Mrs. Forbes had the precaution to remove it before I was ushered again
into the room where I had discovered it. I was at some trouble to hit upon any
plan by which to gain a second sight of it; but I was resolved that Mrs. Forbes
should not leave Alexandria without giving me a full explanation. We were
waiting for remittances and instructions from England, and in the meantime
the violence of her grief abated, and she recovered a good share of her old
buoyancy and loveliness, which had so delighted me on my first acquaintance
with her. As her demands upon my sympathy weakened, my curiosity grew
stronger, and at last mastered me. I carried with me a netted purse which
required mending, and I asked her to catch up the broken meshes while I
waited for it.
"I will tell your maid to bring your workbox," I said, going to the door and
calling the servant. "Your mistress has a red morocco workbox," I said to her,
as she answered my summons.
"Yes, sir," she replied.
"Where is it?"
"In her bedroom," she said.
"Mrs. Forbes wishes it brought here." I turned back into the room. Mrs.
Forbes had gone deadly pale, but her eyes looked sullen, and her teeth were
clenched under her lips with an expression of stubbornness. The maid brought
the workbox. I walked, with it in my hands, up to the sofa where she was
seated.

"You remember this mark?" I asked; "I think neither of us can ever forget
it."
She did not answer by word, but there was a very intelligent gleam in her
blue eyes.
"Now," I continued, softly, "I promised your father to befriend you, and I
am not a man to forget a promise. But you must tell me the whole simple
truth."
I was compelled to reason with her, and to urge her for some time. I
confess I went so far as to remind her that there was an English consul at
Alexandria, to whom I could resort. At last she opened her stubborn lips, and
the whole story came out, mingled with sobs and showers of tears.
She had been in love with Alfred, she said, and they were too poor to
marry, and papa would not hear of such a thing. She was always in want of
money, she was kept so short; and they promised to give her such a great sum
-a vast sum-five hundred pounds.
"But who bribed you?" I inquired.
A foreign gentleman whom she had met in London, called Monsieur
Bonnard. It was a French name, but she was not sure that he was a Frenchman.
He talked to her about her father being a surveyor in the post-office, and asked
her a great number of questions. A few weeks after, she met him in their own
town by accident, she and Mr. Forbes; and Alfred had a long private talk with
him, and they came to her, and told her she could help them very much. They
asked her if she could be brave enough to carry off a little red box out of the
travelling post-office, containing nothing but papers. After a while she
consented. When she had confessed so much under compulsion, Mrs. Forbes
seemed to take a pleasure in the narrative, and went on fluently.
"We required papa's signature to the order, and we did not know how to
get it. Luckily he had a fit of the gout, and was very peevish; and I had to read
over a lot of official papers to him, and then he signed them. One of the papers
I read twice, and slipped the order into its place after the second reading. I
thought I should have died with fright; but just then he was in great pain, and
glad to get his work over. I made an excuse that I was going to visit my aunt at
Beckby, but instead of going there direct, we contrived to be at the station at
Eaton a minute or two before the mail train came up. I kept outside the station
door till we heard the whistle, and just then the postman came running down
the road, and I followed him straight through the booking-office, and asked
him to give you the order, which I put into his hand. He scarcely saw me. I just
caught a glimpse of Monsieur Bonnard's face through the window of the
compartment next the van, when Alfred had gone. They had promised me that
the train should stop at Camden-town, if I could only keep your attention
engaged until then. You know how I succeeded."
"But how did you dispose of the box?" I asked. "You could not have

concealed it about you; that I am sure of."
"Ah!" she said, "nothing was easier. Monsieur Bonnard had described the
van to me, and you remember I put the box down at the end of the counter,
close to the corner where I hid myself at every station. There was a door with
a window in it, and I asked if I might have the window open, as the van was
too warm for me. I believe Monsieur Bonnard could have taken it from me by
only leaning through his window, but he preferred stepping out, and taking it
from my hand, just as the train was leaving Watford-on the far side of the
carriages, you understand. It was the last station, and the train came to a stand
at Camden-town. After all, the box was not out of your sight more than twenty
minutes before you missed it. Monsieur Bonnard and I hurried out of the
station, and Alfred followed us. The box was forced open-the lock has never
been mended, for it was a peculiar one-and Monsieur Bonnard took
possession of the papers. He left the box with me, after putting inside it a roll
of notes. Alfred and I were married next morning, and I went back to my
aunt's; but we did not tell papa of our marriage for three or four months. That
is the story of my red morocco workbox."
She smiled with the provoking mirthfulness of a mischievous child. There
was one point still, on which my curiosity was unsatisfied.
"Did you know what the despatches were about?" I asked.
"O no!" she answered; "I never understood politics in the least. I knew
nothing about them. Monsieur did not say a word; he did not even look at the
papers while we were by. I would never, never, have taken a registered letter,
or anything with money in it, you know. But all those papers could be written
again quite easily. You must not think me a thief, Mr. Wilcox; there was
nothing worth money among the papers."
"They were worth five hundred pounds to you," I said. "Did you ever see
Bonnard again?"
"Never again," she replied. "He said he was going to return to his native
country. I don't think Bonnard was his real name."
Most likely not, I thought; but I said no more to Mrs. Forbes. Once again I
was involved in a great perplexity about this affair. It was clearly my duty to
report the discovery at head-quarters, but I shrank from doing so. One of the
chief culprits was already gone to another judgment than that of man; several
years had obliterated all traces of Monsieur Bonnard; and the only victim of
justice would be this poor little dupe of the two greater criminals. At last I
came to the conclusion to send the whole of the particulars to Mr. Huntingdon
himself; and I wrote them to him, without remark or comment.
The answer that came to Mrs. Forbes and me in Alexandria was the
announcement of Mr. Huntingdon's sudden death of some disease of the heart,
on the day which I calculated would put him in possession of my
communication. Mrs. Forbes was again overwhelmed with apparently

heartrending sorrow and remorse. The income left to her was something less
than one hundred pounds a year. The secretary of the post-office, who had
been a personal friend of the deceased gentleman, was his sole executor; and I
received a letter from him, containing one for Mrs. Forbes, which
recommended her, in terms not to be misunderstood, to fix upon some
residence abroad, and not to return to England. She fancied she would like the
seclusion and quiet of a convent; and I made arrangements for her to enter one
in Malta, where she would still be under British protection. I left Alexandria
myself on the arrival of another packet-agent; and on my return to London I
had a private interview with the secretary. I found that there was no need to
inform him of the circumstances I have related to you, as he had taken
possession of all Mr. Huntingdon's papers. In consideration of his ancient
friendship, and of the escape of those who most merited punishment, he had
come to the conclusion that it was quite as well to let bygones be bygones.
At the conclusion of the interview I delivered a message which Mrs.
Forbes had emphatically entrusted to me.
"Mrs. Forbes wished me to impress upon your mind," I said, "that neither
she nor Mr. Forbes would have been guilty of this misdemeanour if they had
not been very much in love with one another, and very much in want of
money."
"Ah!" replied the secretary, with a smile, "if Cleopatra's nose had been
shorter, the fate of the world would have been different!"

No. 5 BRANCH LINE
THE ENGINEER

His name, sir, was Matthew Price; mine is Benjamin Hardy. We were born
within a few days of each other; bred up in the same village; taught at the
same school. I cannot remember the time when we were not close friends.
Even as boys, we never knew what it was to quarrel. We had not a thought, we
had not a possession, that was not in common. We would have stood by each
other, fearlessly, to the death. It was such a friendship as one reads about
sometimes in books: fast and firm as the great Tors upon our native
moorlands, true as the sun in the heavens.

The name of our village was Chadleigh. Lifted high above the pasture flats
which stretched away at our feet like a measureless green lake and melted into
mist on the furthest horizon, it nestled, a tiny stone-built hamlet, in a sheltered
hollow about midway between the plain and the plateau. Above us, rising
ridge beyond ridge, slope beyond slope, spread the mountainous moorcountry, bare and bleak for the most part, with here and there a patch of
cultivated field or hardy plantation, and crowned highest of all with masses of
huge grey crag, abrupt, isolated, hoary, and older than the deluge. These were
the Tors-Druids' Tor, King's Tor, Castle Tor, and the like; sacred places, as I
have heard, in the ancient time, where crownings, burnings, human sacrifices,
and all kinds of bloody heathen rites were performed. Bones, too, had been
found there, and arrow-heads, and ornaments of gold and glass. I had a vague
awe of the Tors in those boyish days, and would not have gone near them after
dark for the heaviest bribe.
I have said that we were born in the same village. He was the son of a
small farmer, named William Price, and the eldest of a family of seven; I was
the only child of Ephraim Hardy, the Chadleigh blacksmith-a well-known
man in those parts, whose memory is not forgotten to this day. Just so far as a
farmer is supposed to be a bigger man than a blacksmith, Mat's father might
be said to have a better standing than mine; but William Price, with his small
holding and his seven boys, was, in fact, as poor as many a day-labourer;
whilst the blacksmith, well-to-do, bustling, popular, and open-handed, was a
person of some importance in the place. All this, however, had nothing to do
with Mat and myself. It never occurred to either of us that his jacket was out at
elbows, or that our mutual funds came altogether from my pocket. It was
enough for us that we sat on the same school-bench, conned our tasks from the
same primer, fought each other's battles, screened each other's faults, fished,
nutted, played truant, robbed orchards and birds' nests together, and spent
every half-hour, authorised or stolen, in each other's society. It was a happy
time; but it could not go on for ever. My father, being prosperous, resolved to
put me forward in the world. I must know more, and do better, than himself.
The forge was not good enough, the little world of Chadleigh not wide
enough, for me. Thus it happened that I was still swinging the satchel when
Mat was whistling at the plough, and that at last, when my future course was
shaped out, we were separated, as it then seemed to us, for life. For,
blacksmith's son as I was, furnace and forge, in some form or other, pleased
me best, and I chose to be a working engineer. So my father by-and-by
apprenticed me to a Birmingham iron-master; and, having bidden farewell to
Mat, and Chadleigh, and the grey old Tors in the shadow of which I had spent
all the days of my life, I turned my face northward, and went over into "the
Black Country."
I am not going to dwell on this part of my story. How I worked out the
term of my apprenticeship; how, when I had served my full time and become a
skilled workman, I took Mat from the plough and brought him over to the

Black Country, sharing with him lodging, wages, experience-all, in short,
that I had to give; how he, naturally quick to learn and brimful of quiet energy,
worked his way up a step at a time, and came by-and-by to be a "first hand" in
his own department; how, during all these years of change, and trial, and
effort, the old boyish affection never wavered or weakened, but went on,
growing with our growth and strengthening with our strength-are facts which
I need do no more than outline in this place.
About this time-it will be remembered that I speak of the days when Mat
and I were on the bright side of thirty-it happened that our firm contracted to
supply six first-class locomotives to run on the new line, then in process of
construction, between Turin and Genoa. It was the first Italian order we had
taken. We had had dealings with France, Holland, Belgium, Germany; but
never with Italy. The connexion, therefore, was new and valuable-all the
more valuable because our Transalpine neighbours had but lately begun to lay
down the iron roads, and would be safe to need more of our good English
work as they went on. So the Birmingham firm set themselves to the contract
with a will, lengthened our working hours, increased our wages, took on fresh
hands, and determined, if energy and promptitude could do it, to place
themselves at the head of the Italian labour-market, and stay there. They
deserved and achieved success. The six locomotives were not only turned out
to time, but were shipped, despatched, and delivered with a promptitude that
fairly amazed our Piedmontese consignee. I was not a little proud, you may be
sure, when I found myself appointed to superintend the transport of the
engines. Being allowed a couple of assistants, I contrived that Mat should be
one of them; and thus we enjoyed together the first great holiday of our lives.
It was a wonderful change for two Birmingham operatives fresh from the
Black Country. The fairy city, with its crescent background of Alps; the port
crowded with strange shipping; the marvellous blue sky and bluer sea; the
painted houses on the quays; the quaint cathedral, faced with black and white
marble; the street of jewellers, like an Arabian Nights' bazaar; the street of
palaces, with its Moorish court-yards, its fountains and orange-trees; the
women veiled like brides; the galley-slaves chained two and two; the
processions of priests and friars; the everlasting clangour of bells; the babble
of a strange tongue; the singular lightness and brightness of the climate-
made, altogether, such a combination of wonders that we wandered about, the
first day, in a kind of bewildered dream, like children at a fair. Before that
week was ended, being tempted by the beauty of the place and the liberality of
the pay, we had agreed to take service with the Turin and Genoa Railway
Company, and to turn our backs upon Birmingham for ever.
Then began a new life-a life so active and healthy, so steeped in fresh air
and sunshine, that we sometimes marvelled how we could have endured the
gloom of the Black Country. We were constantly up and down the line: now at
Genoa, now at Turin, taking trial trips with the locomotives, and placing our

old experiences at the service of our new employers.
In the meanwhile we made Genoa our headquarters, and hired a couple of
rooms over a small shop in a by-street sloping down to the quays. Such a busy
little street-so steep and winding that no vehicles could pass through it, and
so narrow that the sky looked like a mere strip of deep-blue ribbon overhead!
Every house in it, however, was a shop, where the goods encroached on the
footway, or were piled about the door, or hung like tapestry from the
balconies; and all day long, from dawn to dusk, an incessant stream of passersby poured up and down between the port and the upper quarter of the city.
Our landlady was the widow of a silver-worker, and lived by the sale of
filigree ornaments, cheap jewellery, combs, fans, and toys in ivory and jet. She
had an only daughter named Gianetta, who served in the shop, and was simply
the most beautiful woman I ever beheld. Looking back across this weary
chasm of years, and bringing her image before me (as I can and do) with all
the vividness of life, I am unable, even now, to detect a flaw in her beauty. I do
not attempt to describe her. I do not believe there is a poet living who could
find the words to do it; but I once saw a picture that was somewhat like her
(not half so lovely, but still like her), and, for aught I know, that picture is still
hanging where I last looked at it-upon the walls of the Louvre. It represented
a woman with brown eyes and golden hair, looking over her shoulder into a
circular mirror held by a bearded man in the background. In this man, as I then
understood, the artist had painted his own portrait; in her, the portrait of the
woman he loved. No picture that I ever saw was half so beautiful, and yet it
was not worthy to be named in the same breath with Gianetta Coneglia.
You may be certain the widow's shop did not want for customers. All
Genoa knew how fair a face was to be seen behind that dingy little counter;
and Gianetta, flirt as she was, had more lovers than she cared to remember,
even by name. Gentle and simple, rich and poor, from the red-capped sailor
buying his earrings or his amulet, to the nobleman carelessly purchasing half
the filigrees in the window, she treated them all alike-encouraged them,
laughed at them, led them on and turned them off at her pleasure. She had no
more heart than a marble statue; as Mat and I discovered by-and-by, to our
bitter cost.
I cannot tell to this day how it came about, or what first led me to suspect
how things were going with us both; but long before the waning of that
autumn a coldness had sprung up between my friend and myself. It was
nothing that could have been put into words. It was nothing that either of us
could have explained or justified, to save his life. We lodged together, ate
together, worked together, exactly as before; we even took our long evening's
walk together, when the day's labour was ended; and except, perhaps, that we
were more silent than of old, no mere looker-on could have detected a shadow
of change. Yet there it was, silent and subtle, widening the gulf between us
every day.

It was not his fault. He was too true and gentle-hearted to have willingly
brought about such a state of things between us. Neither do I believe-fiery as
my nature is-that it was mine. It was all hers-hers from first to last-the
sin, and the shame, and the sorrow.
If she had shown a fair and open preference for either of us, no real harm
could have come of it. I would have put any constraint upon myself, and,
Heaven knows! have borne any suffering, to see Mat really happy. I know that
he would have done the same, and more if he could, for me. But Gianetta
cared not one sou for either. She never meant to choose between us. It gratified
her vanity to divide us; it amused her to play with us. It would pass my power
to tell how, by a thousand imperceptible shades of coquetry-by the lingering
of a glance, the substitution of a word, the flitting of a smile-she contrived to
turn our heads, and torture our hearts, and lead us on to love her. She deceived
us both. She buoyed us both up with hope; she maddened us with jealousy; she
crushed us with despair. For my part, when I seemed to wake to a sudden
sense of the ruin that was about our path and I saw how the truest friendship
that ever bound two lives together was drifting on to wreck and ruin, I asked
myself whether any woman in the world was worth what Mat had been to me
and I to him. But this was not often. I was readier to shut my eyes upon the
truth than to face it; and so lived on, wilfully, in a dream.
Thus the autumn passed away, and winter came-the strange, treacherous,
Genoese winter, green with olive and ilex, brilliant with sunshine, and bitter
with storm. Still, rivals at heart and friends on the surface, Mat and I lingered
on in our lodging in the Vicolo Balba. Still Gianetta held us with her fatal
wiles and her still more fatal beauty. At length there came a day when I felt I
could bear the horrible misery and suspense of it no longer. The sun, I vowed,
should not go down before I knew my sentence. She must choose between us.
She must either take me or let me go. I was reckless. I was desperate. I was
determined to know the worst, or the best. If the worst, I would at once turn
my back upon Genoa, upon her, upon all the pursuits and purposes of my past
life, and begin the world anew. This I told her, passionately and sternly,
standing before her in the little parlour at the back of the shop, one bleak
December morning.
"If it's Mat whom you care for most," I said, "tell me so in one word, and I
will never trouble you again. He is better worth your love. I am jealous and
exacting; he is as trusting and unselfish as a woman. Speak, Gianetta; am I to
bid you good-bye for ever and ever, or am I to write home to my mother in
England, bidding her pray to God to bless the woman who has promised to be
my wife?"
"You plead your friend's cause well," she replied, haughtily. "Matteo
ought to be grateful. This is more than he ever did for you."
"Give me my answer, for pity's sake," I exclaimed, "and let me go!"

"You are free to go or stay, Signor Inglese," she replied. "I am not your
jailor."
"Do you bid me leave you?"
"Beata Madre! not I."
"Will you marry me, if I stay?"
She laughed aloud-such a merry, mocking, musical laugh, like a chime of
silver bells!
"You ask too much," she said.
"Only what you have led me to hope these five or six months past!"
"That is just what Matteo says. How tiresome you both are!"
"O, Gianetta," I said, passionately, "be serious for one moment! I am a
rough fellow, it is true-not half good enough or clever enough for you; but I
love you with my whole heart, and an Emperor could do no more."
"I am glad of it," she replied; "I do not want you to love me less."
"Then you cannot wish to make me wretched! Will you promise me?"
"I promise nothing," said she, with another burst of laughter; "except that I
will not marry Matteo!"
Except that she would not marry Matteo! Only that. Not a word of hope
for myself. Nothing but my friend's condemnation. I might get comfort, and
selfish triumph, and some sort of base assurance out of that, if I could. And so,
to my shame, I did. I grasped at the vain encouragement, and, fool that I was!
let her put me off again unanswered. From that day, I gave up all effort at selfcontrol, and let myself drift blindly on-to destruction.
At length things became so bad between Mat and myself that it seemed as
if an open rupture must be at hand. We avoided each other, scarcely exchanged
a dozen sentences in a day, and fell away from all our old familiar habits. At
this time-I shudder to remember it!-there were moments when I felt that I
hated him.
Thus, with the trouble deepening and widening between us day by day,
another month or five weeks went by; and February came; and, with February,
the Carnival. They said in Genoa that it was a particularly dull carnival; and so
it must have been; for, save a flag or two hung out in some of the principal
streets, and a sort of festa look about the women, there were no special
indications of the season. It was, I think, the second day when, having been on
the line all the morning, I returned to Genoa at dusk, and, to my surprise,
found Mat Price on the platform. He came up to me, and laid his hand on my
arm.
"You are in late," he said. "I have been waiting for you three-quarters of an
hour. Shall we dine together to-day?"

Impulsive as I am, this evidence of returning good will at once called up
my better feelings.
"With all my heart, Mat," I replied; "shall we go to Gozzoli's?"
"No, no," he said, hurriedly. "Some quieter place-some place where we
can talk. I have something to say to you."
I noticed now that he looked pale and agitated, and an uneasy sense of
apprehension stole upon me. We decided on the "Pescatore," a little out-ofthe-way trattoria, down near the Molo Vecchio. There, in a dingy salon,
frequented chiefly by seamen, and redolent of tobacco, we ordered our simple
dinner. Mat scarcely swallowed a morsel; but, calling presently for a bottle of
Sicilian wine, drank eagerly.
"Well, Mat," I said, as the last dish was placed on the table, "what news
have you?"
"Bad."
"I guessed that from your face."
"Bad for you-bad for me. Gianetta."
"What of Gianetta?"
He passed his hand nervously across his lips.
"Gianetta is false-worse than false," he said, in a hoarse voice. "She
values an honest man's heart just as she values a flower for her hair-wears it
for a day, then throws it aside for ever. She has cruelly wronged us both."
"In what way? Good Heavens, speak out!"
"In the worst way that a woman can wrong those who love her. She has
sold herself to the Marchese Loredano."
The blood rushed to my head and face in a burning torrent. I could
scarcely see, and dared not trust myself to speak.
"I saw her going towards the cathedral," he went on, hurriedly. "It was
about three hours ago. I thought she might be going to confession, so I hung
back and followed her at a distance. When she got inside, however, she went
straight to the back of the pulpit, where this man was waiting for her. You
remember him-an old man who used to haunt the shop a month or two back.
Well, seeing how deep in conversation they were, and how they stood close
under the pulpit with their backs towards the church, I fell into a passion of
anger and went straight up the aisle, intending to say or do something: I
scarcely knew what; but, at all events, to draw her arm through mine, and take
her home. When I came within a few feet, however, and found only a big
pillar between myself and them, I paused. They could not see me, nor I them;
but I could hear their voices distinctly, and-and I listened."
"Well, and you heard-"

"The terms of a shameful bargain-beauty on the one side, gold on the
other; so many thousand francs a year; a villa near Naples-Pah! it makes me
sick to repeat it."
And, with a shudder, he poured out another glass of wine and drank it at a
draught.
"After that," he said, presently, "I made no effort to bring her away. The
whole thing was so cold-blooded, so deliberate, so shameful, that I felt I had
only to wipe her out of my memory, and leave her to her fate. I stole out of the
cathedral, and walked about here by the sea for ever so long, trying to get my
thoughts straight. Then I remembered you, Ben; and the recollection of how
this wanton had come between us and broken up our lives drove me wild. So I
went up to the station and waited for you. I felt you ought to know it all; and-
and I thought, perhaps, that we might go back to England together."
"The Marchese Loredano!"
It was all that I could say; all that I could think. As Mat had just said of
himself, I felt "like one stunned."
"There is one other thing I may as well tell you," he added, reluctantly, "if
only to show you how false a woman can be. We-we were to have been
married next month."
"We? Who? What do you mean?"
"I mean that we were to have been married-Gianetta and I."
A sudden storm of rage, of scorn, of incredulity, swept over me at this, and
seemed to carry my senses away.
"You!" I cried. "Gianetta marry you! I don't believe it."
"I wish I had not believed it," he replied, looking up as if puzzled by my
vehemence. "But she promised me; and I thought, when she promised it, she
meant it."
"She told me, weeks ago, that she would never be your wife!"
His colour rose, his brow darkened; when his answer came, it was as calm
as the last.
"Indeed!" he said. "Then it is only one baseness more. She told me that she
had refused you; and that was why we kept our engagement secret."
"Tell the truth, Mat Price," I said, well-nigh beside myself with suspicion.
"Confess that every word of this is false! Confess that Gianetta will not listen
to you, and that you are afraid I may succeed where you have failed. As
perhaps I shall-as perhaps I shall, after all!"
"Are you mad?" he exclaimed. "What do you mean?"
"That I believe it's just a trick to get me away to England-that I don't
credit a syllable of your story. You're a liar, and I hate you!"

He rose, and, laying one hand on the back of his chair, looked me sternly
in the face.
"If you were not Benjamin Hardy," he said, deliberately, "I would thrash
you within an inch of your life."
The words had no sooner passed his lips than I sprang at him. I have never
been able distinctly to remember what followed. A curse-a blow-a struggle
-a moment of blind fury-a cry-a confusion of tongues-a circle of strange
faces. Then I see Mat lying back in the arms of a bystander; myself trembling
and bewildered-the knife dropping from my grasp; blood upon the floor;
blood upon my hands; blood upon his shirt. And then I hear those dreadful
words:
"O, Ben, you have murdered me!"
He did not die-at least, not there and then. He was carried to the nearest
hospital, and lay for some weeks between life and death. His case, they said,
was difficult and dangerous. The knife had gone in just below the collarbone,
and pierced down into the lungs. He was not allowed to speak or turn-
scarcely to breathe with freedom. He might not even lift his head to drink. I sat
by him day and night all through that sorrowful time. I gave up my situation
on the railway; I quitted my lodging in the Vicolo Balba; I tried to forget that
such a woman as Gianetta Coneglia had ever drawn breath. I lived only for
Mat; and he tried to live more, I believe, for my sake than his own. Thus, in
the bitter silent hours of pain and penitence, when no hand but mine
approached his lips or smoothed his pillow, the old friendship came back with
even more than its old trust and faithfulness. He forgave me, fully and freely;
and I would thankfully have given my life for him.
At length there came one bright spring morning, when, dismissed as
convalescent, he tottered out through the hospital gates, leaning on my arm,
and feeble as an infant. He was not cured; neither, as I then learned to my
horror and anguish, was it possible that he ever could be cured. He might live,
with care, for some years; but the lungs were injured beyond hope of remedy,
and a strong or healthy man he could never be again. These, spoken aside to
me, were the parting words of the chief physician, who advised me to take him
further south without delay.
I took him to a little coast-town called Rocca, some thirty miles beyond
Genoa-a sheltered lonely place along the Riviera, where the sea was even
bluer than the sky, and the cliffs were green with strange tropical plants, cacti,
and aloes, and Egyptian palms. Here we lodged in the house of a small
tradesman; and Mat, to use his own words, "set to work at getting well in good
earnest." But, alas! it was a work which no earnestness could forward. Day
after day he went down to the beach, and sat for hours drinking the sea air and
watching the sails that came and went in the offing. By-and-by he could go no
further than the garden of the house in which we lived. A little later, and he

spent his days on a couch beside the open window, waiting patiently for the
end. Ay, for the end! It had come to that. He was fading fast, waning with the
waning summer, and conscious that the Reaper was at hand. His whole aim
now was to soften the agony of my remorse, and prepare me for what must
shortly come.
"I would not live longer, if I could," he said, lying on his couch one
summer evening, and looking up to the stars. "If I had my choice at this
moment, I would ask to go. I should like Gianetta to know that I forgave her."
"She shall know it," I said, trembling suddenly from head to foot.
He pressed my hand.
"And you'll write to father?"
"I will."
I had drawn a little back, that he might not see the tears raining down my
cheeks; but he raised himself on his elbow, and looked round.
"Don't fret, Ben," he whispered; laid his head back wearily upon the
pillow-and so died.
And this was the end of it. This was the end of all that made life life to me.
I buried him there, in hearing of the wash of a strange sea on a strange shore. I
stayed by the grave till the priest and the bystanders were gone. I saw the earth
filled in to the last sod, and the gravedigger stamp it down with his feet. Then,
and not till then, I felt that I had lost him for ever-the friend I had loved, and
hated, and slain. Then, and not till then, I knew that all rest, and joy, and hope
were over for me. From that moment my heart hardened within me, and my
life was filled with loathing. Day and night, land and sea, labour and rest, food
and sleep, were alike hateful to me. It was the curse of Cain, and that my
brother had pardoned me made it lie none the lighter. Peace on earth was for
me no more, and goodwill towards men was dead in my heart for ever.
Remorse softens some natures; but it poisoned mine. I hated all mankind; but
above all mankind I hated the woman who had come between us two, and
ruined both our lives.
He had bidden me seek her out, and be the messenger of his forgiveness. I
had sooner have gone down to the port of Genoa and taken upon me the serge
cap and shotted chain of any galley-slave at his toil in the public works; but
for all that I did my best to obey him. I went back, alone and on foot. I went
back, intending to say to her, "Gianetta Coneglia, he forgave you; but God
never will." But she was gone. The little shop was let to a fresh occupant; and
the neighbours only knew that mother and daughter had left the place quite
suddenly, and that Gianetta was supposed to be under the "protection" of the
Marchese Loredano. How I made inquiries here and there-how I heard that
they had gone to Naples-and how, being restless and reckless of my time, I
worked my passage in a French steamer, and followed her-how, having

found the sumptuous villa that was now hers, I learned that she had left there
some ten days and gone to Paris, where the Marchese was ambassador for the
Two Sicilies-how, working my passage back again to Marseilles, and thence,
in part by the river and in part by the rail, I made my way to Paris-how, day
after day, I paced the streets and the parks, watched at the ambassador's gates,
followed his carriage, and at last, after weeks of waiting, discovered her
address-how, having written to request an interview, her servants spurned me
from her door and flung my letter in my face-how, looking up at her
windows, I then, instead of forgiving, solemnly cursed her with the bitterest
curses my tongue could devise-and how, this done, I shook the dust of Paris
from my feet, and became a wanderer upon the face of the earth, are facts
which I have now no space to tell.
The next six or eight years of my life were shifting and unsettled enough.
A morose and restless man, I took employment here and there, as opportunity
offered, turning my hand to many things, and caring little what I earned, so
long as the work was hard and the change incessant. First of all I engaged
myself as chief engineer in one of the French steamers plying between
Marseilles and Constantinople. At Constantinople I changed to one of the
Austrian Lloyd's boats, and worked for some time to and from Alexandria,
Jaffa, and those parts. After that, I fell in with a party of Mr. Layard's men at
Cairo, and so went up the Nile and took a turn at the excavations of the mound
of Nimroud. Then I became a working engineer on the new desert line
between Alexandria and Suez; and by-and-by I worked my passage out to
Bombay, and took service as an engine fitter on one of the great Indian
railways. I stayed a long time in India; that is to say, I stayed nearly two years,
which was a long time for me; and I might not even have left so soon, but for
the war that was declared just then with Russia. That tempted me. For I loved
danger and hardship as other men love safety and ease; and as for my life, I
had sooner have parted from it than kept it, any day. So I came straight back to
England; betook myself to Portsmouth, where my testimonials at once
procured me the sort of berth I wanted. I went out to the Crimea in the engineroom of one of her Majesty's war steamers.
I served with the fleet, of course, while the war lasted; and when it was
over, went wandering off again, rejoicing in my liberty. This time I went to
Canada, and after working on a railway then in progress near the American
frontier, I presently passed over into the States; journeyed from north to south;
crossed the Rocky Mountains; tried a month or two of life in the gold country;
and then, being seized with a sudden, aching, unaccountable longing to revisit
that solitary grave so far away on the Italian coast, I turned my face once more
towards Europe.
Poor little grave! I found it rank with weeds, the cross half shattered, the
inscription half effaced. It was as if no one had loved him, or remembered
him. I went back to the house in which we had lodged together. The same

people were still living there, and made me kindly welcome. I stayed with
them for some weeks. I weeded, and planted, and trimmed the grave with my
own hands, and set up a fresh cross in pure white marble. It was the first
season of rest that I had known since I laid him there; and when at last I
shouldered my knapsack and set forth again to battle with the world, I
promised myself that, God willing, I would creep back to Rocca, when my
days drew near to ending, and be buried by his side.
From hence, being, perhaps, a little less inclined than formerly for very
distant parts, and willing to keep within reach of that grave, I went no further
than Mantua, where I engaged myself as an engine-driver on the line, then not
long completed, between that city and Venice. Somehow, although I had been
trained to the working engineering, I preferred in these days to earn my bread
by driving. I liked the excitement of it, the sense of power, the rush of the air,
the roar of the fire, the flitting of the landscape. Above all, I enjoyed to drive a
night express. The worse the weather, the better it suited with my sullen
temper. For I was as hard, and harder than ever. The years had done nothing to
soften me. They had only confirmed all that was blackest and bitterest in my
heart.
I continued pretty faithful to the Mantua line, and had been working on it
steadily for more than seven months when that which I am now about to relate
took place.
It was in the month of March. The weather had been unsettled for some
days past, and the nights stormy; and at one point along the line, near Ponte di
Brenta, the waters had risen and swept away some seventy yards of
embankment. Since this accident, the trains had all been obliged to stop at a
certain spot between Padua and Ponte di Brenta, and the passengers, with their
luggage, had thence to be transported in all kinds of vehicles, by a circuitous
country road, to the nearest station on the other side of the gap, where another
train and engine awaited them. This, of course, caused great confusion and
annoyance, put all our time-tables wrong, and subjected the public to a large
amount of inconvenience. In the meanwhile an army of navvies was drafted to
the spot, and worked day and night to repair the damage. At this time I was
driving two through trains each day; namely, one from Mantua to Venice in the
early morning, and a return train from Venice to Mantua in the afternoon-a
tolerably full day's work, covering about one hundred and ninety miles of
ground, and occupying between ten and eleven hours. I was therefore not best
pleased when, on the third or fourth day after the accident, I was informed
that, in addition to my regular allowance of work, I should that evening be
required to drive a special train to Venice. This special train, consisting of an
engine, a single carriage, and a break-van, was to leave the Mantua platform at
eleven; at Padua the passengers were to alight and find post-chaises waiting to
convey them to Ponte di Brenta; at Ponte di Brenta another engine, carriage,
and break-van were to be in readiness. I was charged to accompany them

throughout.
"Corpo di Bacco," said the clerk who gave me my orders, "you need not
look so black, man. You are certain of a handsome gratuity. Do you know who
goes with you?"
"Not I."
"Not you, indeed! Why, it's the Duca Loredano, the Neapolitan
ambassador."
"Loredano!" I stammered. "What Loredano? There was a Marchese-"
"Certo. He was the Marchese Loredano some years ago; but he has come
into his dukedom since then."
"He must be a very old man by this time."
"Yes, he is old; but what of that? He is as hale, and bright, and stately as
ever. You have seen him before?"
"Yes," I said, turning away; "I have seen him-years ago."
"You have heard of his marriage?"
I shook my head.
The clerk chuckled, rubbed his hands, and shrugged his shoulders.
"An extraordinary affair," he said. "Made a tremendous esclandre at the
time. He married his mistress-quite a common, vulgar girl-a Genoese-
very handsome; but not received, of course. Nobody visits her."
"Married her!" I exclaimed. "Impossible."
"True, I assure you."
I put my hand to my head. I felt as if I had had a fall or a blow.
"Does she-does she go to-night?" I faltered.
"O dear, yes-goes everywhere with him-never lets him out of her sight.
You'll see her-la bella Duchessa!"
With this my informant laughed, and rubbed his hands again, and went
back to his office.
The day went by, I scarcely know how, except that my whole soul was in a
tumult of rage and bitterness. I returned from my afternoon's work about 7.25,
and at 10.30 I was once again at the station. I had examined the engine; given
instructions to the Fochista, or stoker, about the fire; seen to the supply of oil;
and got all in readiness, when, just as I was about to compare my watch with
the clock in the ticket-office, a hand was laid upon my arm, and a voice in my
ear said:
"Are you the engine-driver who is going on with this special train?"
I had never seen the speaker before. He was a small, dark man, muffled up

about the throat, with blue glasses, a large black beard, and his hat drawn low
upon his eyes.
"You are a poor man, I suppose," he said, in a quick, eager whisper, "and,
like other poor men, would not object to be better off. Would you like to earn a
couple of thousand florins?"
"In what way?"
"Hush! You are to stop at Padua, are you not, and to go on again at Ponte
di Brenta?"
I nodded.
"Suppose you did nothing of the kind. Suppose, instead of turning off the
steam, you jump off the engine, and let the train run on?"
"Impossible. There are seventy yards of embankment gone, and-"
"Basta! I know that. Save yourself, and let the train run on. It would be
nothing but an accident."
I turned hot and cold; I trembled; my heart beat fast, and my breath failed.
"Why do you tempt me?" I faltered.
"For Italy's sake," he whispered; "for liberty's sake. I know you are no
Italian; but, for all that, you may be a friend. This Loredano is one of his
country's bitterest enemies. Stay, here are the two thousand florins."
I thrust his hand back fiercely.
"No-no," I said. "No blood-money. If I do it, I do it neither for Italy nor
for money; but for vengeance."
"For vengeance!" he repeated.
At this moment the signal was given for backing up to the platform. I
sprang to my place upon the engine without another word. When I again
looked towards the spot where he had been standing, the stranger was gone.
I saw them take their places-Duke and Duchess, secretary and priest,
valet and maid. I saw the station-master bow them into the carriage, and stand,
bareheaded, beside the door. I could not distinguish their faces; the platform
was too dusk, and the glare from the engine fire too strong; but I recognised
her stately figure, and the poise of her head. Had I not been told who she was,
I should have known her by those traits alone. Then the guard's whistle
shrilled out, and the station-master made his last bow; I turned the steam on;
and we started.
My blood was on fire. I no longer trembled or hesitated. I felt as if every
nerve was iron, and every pulse instinct with deadly purpose. She was in my
power, and I would be revenged. She should die-she, for whom I had stained
my soul with my friend's blood! She should die, in the plenitude of her wealth
and her beauty, and no power upon earth should save her!

The stations flew past. I put on more steam; I bade the fireman heap in the
coke, and stir the blazing mass. I would have outstripped the wind, had it been
possible. Faster and faster-hedges and trees, bridges and stations, flashing
past-villages no sooner seen than gone-telegraph wires twisting, and
dipping, and twining themselves in one, with the awful swiftness of our pace!
Faster and faster, till the fireman at my side looks white and scared, and
refuses to add more fuel to the furnace. Faster and faster, till the wind rushes
in our faces and drives the breath back upon our lips.
I would have scorned to save myself. I meant to die with the rest. Mad as I
was-and I believe from my very soul that I was utterly mad for the time-I
felt a passing pang of pity for the old man and his suite. I would have spared
the poor fellow at my side, too, if I could; but the pace at which we were going
made escape impossible.
Vicenza was passed-a mere confused vision of lights. Pojana flew by. At
Padua, but nine miles distant, our passengers were to alight. I saw the
fireman's face turned upon me in remonstrance; I saw his lips move, though I
could not hear a word; I saw his expression change suddenly from
remonstrance to a deadly terror, and then-merciful Heaven! then, for the first
time, I saw that he and I were no longer alone upon the engine.
There was a third man-a third man standing on my right hand, as the
fireman was standing on my left-a tall, stalwart man, with short curling hair,
and a flat Scotch cap upon his head. As I fell back in the first shock of
surprise, he stepped nearer; took my place at the engine, and turned the steam
off. I opened my lips to speak to him; he turned his head slowly, and looked
me in the face.
Matthew Price!
I uttered one long wild cry, flung my arms wildly up above my head, and
fell as if I had been smitten with an axe.
I am prepared for the objections that may be made to my story. I expect, as
a matter of course, to be told that this was an optical illusion, or that I was
suffering from pressure on the brain, or even that I laboured under an attack of
temporary insanity. I have heard all these arguments before, and, if I may be
forgiven for saying so, I have no desire to hear them again. My own mind has
been made up upon this subject for many a year. All that I can say-all that I
know is-that Matthew Price came back from the dead to save my soul and the
lives of those whom I, in my guilty rage, would have hurried to destruction. I
believe this as I believe in the mercy of Heaven and the forgiveness of
repentant sinners.


A Tale Of Two Cities Vol.III

The traveller fared slowly on his way, who fared towards Paris from England
in the autumn of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninetytwo. More
than enough of bad roads, bad equipages, and bad horses, he would have
encountered to delay him, though the fallen and unfortunate King of France
had been upon his throne in all his glory; but, the changed times were fraught
with other obstacles than these. Every towngate and village taxinghouse had
its band of citizenpatriots, with their national muskets in a most explosive state
of readiness, who stopped all comers and goers, crossquestioned them,
inspected their papers, looked for their names in lists of their own, turned them
back, or sent them on, or stopped them and laid them in hold, as their

capricious judgment or fancy deemed best for the dawning Republic One and
Indivisible, of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death.
A very few French leagues of his journey were accomplished, when Charles
Darnay began to perceive that for him along these country roads there was no
hope of return until he should have been declared a good citizen at Paris.
Whatever might befall now, he must on to his journey's end. Not a mean
village closed upon him, not a common barrier dropped across the road behind
him, but he knew it to be another iron door in the series that was barred
between him and England. The universal watchfulness so encompassed him,
that if he had been taken in a net, or were being forwarded to his destination in
a cage, he could not have felt his freedom more completely gone.
This universal watchfulness not only stopped him on the highway twenty
times in a stage, but retarded his progress twenty times in a day, by riding after
him and taking him back, riding before him and stopping him by anticipation,
riding with him and keeping him in charge. He had been days upon his
journey in France alone, when he went to bed tired out, in a little town on the
high road, still a long way from Paris.
Nothing but the production of the afflicted Gabelle's letter from his prison of
the Abbaye would have got him on so far. His difficulty at the guardhouse in
this small place had been such, that he felt his journey to have come to a crisis.
And he was, therefore, as little surprised as a man could be, to find himself
awakened at the small inn to which he had been remitted until morning, in the
middle of the night.
Awakened by a timid local functionary and three armed patriots in rough red
caps and with pipes in their mouths, who sat down on the bed.
"Emigrant," said the functionary, "I am going to send you on to Paris, under an
escort."
"Citizen, I desire nothing more than to get to Paris, though I could dispense
with the escort."
"Silence!" growled a redcap, striking at the coverlet with the buttend of his
musket. "Peace, aristocrat!"
"It is as the good patriot says," observed the timid functionary. "You are an
aristocrat, and must have an escortand must pay for it."
"I have no choice," said Charles Darnay.
"Choice! Listen to him!" cried the same scowling redcap. "As if it was not a
favour to be protected from the lampiron!"

"It is always as the good patriot says," observed the functionary. "Rise and
dress yourself, emigrant."
Darnay complied, and was taken back to the guardhouse, where other patriots
in rough red caps were smoking, drinking, and sleeping, by a watchfire. Here
he paid a heavy price for his escort, and hence he started with it on the wet,
wet roads at three o'clock in the morning.
The escort were two mounted patriots in red caps and tricoloured cockades,
armed with national muskets and sabres, who rode one on either side of him.
The escorted governed his own horse, but a loose line was attached to his
bridle, the end of which one of the patriots kept girded round his wrist. In this
state they set forth with the sharp rain driving in their faces: clattering at a
heavy dragoon trot over the uneven town pavement, and out upon the
miredeep roads. In this state they traversed without change, except of horses
and pace, all the miredeep leagues that lay between them and the capital.
They travelled in the night, halting an hour or two after daybreak, and lying by
until the twilight fell. The escort were so wretchedly clothed, that they twisted
straw round their bare legs, and thatched their ragged shoulders to keep the
wet off. Apart from the personal discomfort of being so attended, and apart
from such considerations of present danger as arose from one of the patriots
being chronically drunk, and carrying his musket very recklessly, Charles
Darnay did not allow the restraint that was laid upon him to awaken any
serious fears in his breast; for, he reasoned with himself that it could have no
reference to the merits of an individual case that was not yet stated, and of
representations, confirmable by the prisoner in the Abbaye, that were not yet
made.
But when they came to the town of Beauvaiswhich they did at eventide, when
the streets were filled with peoplehe could not conceal from himself that the
aspect of affairs was very alarming. An ominous crowd gathered to see him
dismount of the postingyard, and many voices called out loudly, "Down with
the emigrant!"
He stopped in the act of swinging himself out of his saddle, and, resuming it as
his safest place, said:
"Emigrant, my friends! Do you not see me here, in France, of my own will?"
"You are a cursed emigrant," cried a farrier, making at him in a furious manner
through the press, hammer in hand; "and you are a cursed aristocrat!"
The postmaster interposed himself between this man and the rider's bridle (at

which he was evidently making), and soothingly said, "Let him be; let him be!
He will be judged at Paris."
"Judged!" repeated the farrier, swinging his hammer. "Ay! and condemned as a
traitor." At this the crowd roared approval.
Checking the postmaster, who was for turning his horse's head to the yard (the
drunken patriot sat composedly in his saddle looking on, with the line round
his wrist), Darnay said, as soon as he could make his voice heard:
"Friends, you deceive yourselves, or you are deceived. I am not a traitor."
"He lies!" cried the smith. "He is a traitor since the decree. His life is forfeit to
the people. His cursed life is not his own!"
At the instant when Darnay saw a rush in the eyes of the crowd, which another
instant would have brought upon him, the postmaster turned his horse into the
yard, the escort rode in close upon his horse's flanks, and the postmaster shut
and barred the crazy double gates. The farrier struck a blow upon them with
his hammer, and the crowd groaned; but, no more was done.
"What is this decree that the smith spoke of?" Darnay asked the postmaster,
when he had thanked him, and stood beside him in the yard.
"Truly, a decree for selling the property of emigrants."
"When passed?"
"On the fourteenth."
"The day I left England!"
"Everybody says it is but one of several, and that there will be othersif there
are not alreadybanishing all emigrants, and condemning all to death who
return. That is what he meant when he said your life was not your own."
"But there are no such decrees yet?"
"What do I know!" said the postmaster, shrugging his shoulders; "there may
be, or there will be. It is all the same. What would you have?"
They rested on some straw in a loft until the middle of the night, and then rode
forward again when all the town was asleep. Among the many wild changes
observable on familiar things which made this wild ride unreal, not the least
was the seeming rarity of sleep. After long and lonely spurring over dreary
roads, they would come to a cluster of poor cottages, not steeped in darkness,
but all glittering with lights, and would find the people, in a ghostly manner in

the dead of the night, circling hand in hand round a shrivelled tree of Liberty,
or all drawn up together singing a Liberty song. Happily, however, there was
sleep in Beauvais that night to help them out of it and they passed on once
more into solitude and loneliness: jingling through the untimely cold and wet,
among impoverished fields that had yielded no fruits of the earth that year,
diversified by the blackened remains of burnt houses, and by the sudden
emergence from ambuscade, and sharp reining up across their way, of patriot
patrols on the watch on all the roads.
Daylight at last found them before the wall of Paris. The barrier was closed
and strongly guarded when they rode up to it.
"Where are the papers of this prisoner?" demanded a resolutelooking man in
authority, who was summoned out by the guard.
Naturally struck by the disagreeable word, Charles Darnay requested the
speaker to take notice that he was a free traveller and French citizen, in charge
of an escort which the disturbed state of the country had imposed upon him,
and which he had paid for.
"Where," repeated the same personage, without taking any heed of him
whatever, "are the papers of this prisoner?"
The drunken patriot had them in his cap, and produced them. Casting his eyes
over Gabelle's letter, the same personage in authority showed some disorder
and surprise, and looked at Darnay with a close attention.
He left escort and escorted without saying a word, however, and went into the
guardroom; meanwhile, they sat upon their horses outside the gate. Looking
about him while in this state of suspense, Charles Darnay observed that the
gate was held by a mixed guard of soldiers and patriots, the latter far
outnumbering the former; and that while ingress into the city for peasants'
carts bringing in supplies, and for similar traffic and traffickers, was easy
enough, egress, even for the homeliest people, was very difficult. A numerous
medley of men and women, not to mention beasts and vehicles of various
sorts, was waiting to issue forth; but, the previous identification was so strict,
that they filtered through the barrier very slowly. Some of these people knew
their turn for examination to be so far off, that they lay down on the ground to
sleep or smoke, while others talked together, or loitered about. The red cap
and tricolour cockade were universal, both among men and women.
When he had sat in his saddle some halfhour, taking note of these things,
Darnay found himself confronted by the same man in authority, who directed
the guard to open the barrier. Then he delivered to the escort, drunk and sober,
a receipt for the escorted, and requested him to dismount. He did so, and the

two patriots, leading his tired horse, turned and rode away without entering the
city.
He accompanied his conductor into a guardroom, smelling of common wine
and tobacco, where certain soldiers and patriots, asleep and awake, drunk and
sober, and in various neutral states between sleeping and waking, drunkenness
and sobriety, were standing and lying about. The light in the guardhouse, half
derived from the waning oillamps of the night, and half from the overcast day,
was in a correspondingly uncertain condition. Some registers were lying open
on a desk, and an officer of a coarse, dark aspect, presided over these.
"Citizen Defarge," said he to Darnay's conductor, as he took a slip of paper to
write on. "Is this the emigrant Evremonde?"
"This is the man."
"Your age, Evremonde?"
"Thirtyseven."
"Married, Evremonde?"
"Yes."
"Where married?"
"In England."
"Without doubt. Where is your wife, Evremonde?"
"In England."
"Without doubt. You are consigned, Evremonde, to the prison of La Force."
"Just Heaven!" exclaimed Darnay. "Under what law, and for what offence?"
The officer looked up from his slip of paper for a moment.
"We have new laws, Evremonde, and new offences, since you were here." He
said it with a hard smile, and went on writing.
"I entreat you to observe that I have come here voluntarily, in response to that
written appeal of a fellowcountryman which lies before you. I demand no
more than the opportunity to do so without delay. Is not that my right?"
"Emigrants have no rights, Evremonde," was the stolid reply. The officer
wrote until he had finished, read over to himself what he had written, sanded
it, and handed it to Defarge, with the words "In secret."

Defarge motioned with the paper to the prisoner that he must accompany him.
The prisoner obeyed, and a guard of two armed patriots attended them.
"Is it you," said Defarge, in a low voice, as they went down the guardhouse
steps and turned into Paris, "who married the daughter of Doctor Manette,
once a prisoner in the Bastille that is no more?"
"Yes," replied Darnay, looking at him with surprise.
"My name is Defarge, and I keep a wineshop in the Quarter Saint Antoine.
Possibly you have heard of me."
"My wife came to your house to reclaim her father? Yes!"
The word "wife" seemed to serve as a gloomy reminder to Defarge, to say
with sudden impatience, "In the name of that sharp female newlyborn, and
called La Guillotine, why did you come to France?"
"You heard me say why, a minute ago. Do you not believe it is the truth?"
"A bad truth for you," said Defarge, speaking with knitted brows, and looking
straight before him.
"Indeed I am lost here. All here is so unprecedented, so changed, so sudden
and unfair, that I am absolutely lost. Will you render me a little help?"
"None." Defarge spoke, always looking straight before him.
"Will you answer me a single question?"
"Perhaps. According to its nature. You can say what it is."
"In this prison that I am going to so unjustly, shall I have some free
communication with the world outside?"
"You will see."
"I am not to be buried there, prejudged, and without any means of presenting
my case?"
"You will see. But, what then? Other people have been similarly buried in
worse prisons, before now."
"But never by me, Citizen Defarge."
Defarge glanced darkly at him for answer, and walked on in a steady and set
silence. The deeper he sank into this silence, the fainter hope there wasor so
Darnay thoughtof his softening in any slight degree. He, therefore, made haste

to say:
"It is of the utmost importance to me (you know, Citizen, even better than I, of
how much importance), that I should be able to communicate to Mr. Lorry of
Tellson's Bank, an English gentleman who is now in Paris, the simple fact,
without comment, that I have been thrown into the prison of La Force. Will
you cause that to be done for me?"
"I will do," Defarge doggedly rejoined, "nothing for you. My duty is to my
country and the People. I am the sworn servant of both, against you. I will do
nothing for you."
Charles Darnay felt it hopeless to entreat him further, and his pride was
touched besides. As they walked on in silence, he could not but see how used
the people were to the spectacle of prisoners passing along the streets. The
very children scarcely noticed him. A few passers turned their heads, and a
few shook their fingers at him as an aristocrat; otherwise, that a man in good
clothes should be going to prison, was no more remarkable than that a labourer
in working clothes should be going to work. In one narrow, dark, and dirty
street through which they passed, an excited orator, mounted on a stool, was
addressing an excited audience on the crimes against the people, of the king
and the royal family. The few words that he caught from this man's lips, first
made it known to Charles Darnay that the king was in prison, and that the
foreign ambassadors had one and all left Paris. On the road (except at
Beauvais) he had heard absolutely nothing. The escort and the universal
watchfulness had completely isolated him.
That he had fallen among far greater dangers than those which had developed
themselves when he left England, he of course knew now. That perils had
thickened about him fast, and might thicken faster and faster yet, he of course
knew now. He could not but admit to himself that he might not have made this
journey, if he could have foreseen the events of a few days. And yet his
misgivings were not so dark as, imagined by the light of this later time, they
would appear. Troubled as the future was, it was the unknown future, and in its
obscurity there was ignorant hope. The horrible massacre, days and nights
long, which, within a few rounds of the clock, was to set a great mark of blood
upon the blessed garnering time of harvest, was as far out of his knowledge as
if it had been a hundred thousand years away. The "sharp female newlyborn,
and called La Guillotine," was hardly known to him, or to the generality of
people, by name. The frightful deeds that were to be soon done, were probably
unimagined at that time in the brains of the doers. How could they have a
place in the shadowy conceptions of a gentle mind?
Of unjust treatment in detention and hardship, and in cruel separation from his

wife and child, he foreshadowed the likelihood, or the certainty; but, beyond
this, he dreaded nothing distinctly. With this on his mind, which was enough
to carry into a dreary prison courtyard, he arrived at the prison of La Force.
A man with a bloated face opened the strong wicket, to whom Defarge
presented "The Emigrant Evremonde."
"What the Devil! How many more of them!" exclaimed the man with the
bloated face.
Defarge took his receipt without noticing the exclamation, and withdrew, with
his two fellowpatriots.
"What the Devil, I say again!" exclaimed the gaoler, left with his wife. "How
many more!"
The gaoler's wife, being provided with no answer to the question, merely
replied, "One must have patience, my dear!" Three turnkeys who entered
responsive to a bell she rang, echoed the sentiment, and one added, "For the
love of Liberty;" which sounded in that place like an inappropriate conclusion.
The prison of La Force was a gloomy prison, dark and filthy, and with a
horrible smell of foul sleep in it. Extraordinary how soon the noisome flavour
of imprisoned sleep, becomes manifest in all such places that are ill cared for!
"In secret, too," grumbled the gaoler, looking at the written paper. "As if I was
not already full to bursting!"
He stuck the paper on a file, in an illhumour, and Charles Darnay awaited his
further pleasure for half an hour: sometimes, pacing to and fro in the strong
arched room: sometimes, resting on a stone seat: in either case detained to be
imprinted on the memory of the chief and his subordinates.
"Come!" said the chief, at length taking up his keys, "come with me,
emigrant."
Through the dismal prison twilight, his new charge accompanied him by
corridor and staircase, many doors clanging and locking behind them, until
they came into a large, low, vaulted chamber, crowded with prisoners of both
sexes. The women were seated at a long table, reading and writing, knitting,
sewing, and embroidering; the men were for the most part standing behind
their chairs, or lingering up and down the room.
In the instinctive association of prisoners with shameful crime and disgrace,
the newcomer recoiled from this company. But the crowning unreality of his
long unreal ride, was, their all at once rising to receive him, with every

refinement of manner known to the time, and with all the engaging graces and
courtesies of life.
So strangely clouded were these refinements by the prison manners and
gloom, so spectral did they become in the inappropriate squalor and misery
through which they were seen, that Charles Darnay seemed to stand in a
company of the dead. Ghosts all! The ghost of beauty, the ghost of stateliness,
the ghost of elegance, the ghost of pride, the ghost of frivolity, the ghost of
wit, the ghost of youth, the ghost of age, all waiting their dismissal from the
desolate shore, all turning on him eyes that were changed by the death they
had died in coming there.
It struck him motionless. The gaoler standing at his side, and the other gaolers
moving about, who would have been well enough as to appearance in the
ordinary exercise of their functions, looked so extravagantly coarse contrasted
with sorrowing mothers and blooming daughters who were therewith the
apparitions of the coquette, the young beauty, and the mature woman
delicately bredthat the inversion of all experience and likelihood which the
scene of shadows presented, was heightened to its utmost. Surely, ghosts all.
Surely, the long unreal ride some progress of disease that had brought him to
these gloomy shades!
"In the name of the assembled companions in misfortune," said a gentleman of
courtly appearance and address, coming forward, "I have the honour of giving
you welcome to La Force, and of condoling with you on the calamity that has
brought you among us. May it soon terminate happily! It would be an
impertinence elsewhere, but it is not so here, to ask your name and condition?"
Charles Darnay roused himself, and gave the required information, in words as
suitable as he could find.
"But I hope," said the gentleman, following the chief gaoler with his eyes, who
moved across the room, "that you are not in secret?"
"I do not understand the meaning of the term, but I have heard them say so."
"Ah, what a pity! We so much regret it! But take courage; several members of
our society have been in secret, at first, and it has lasted but a short time."
Then he added, raising his voice, "I grieve to inform the societyin secret."
There was a murmur of commiseration as Charles Darnay crossed the room to
a grated door where the gaoler awaited him, and many voicesamong which,
the soft and compassionate voices of women were conspicuousgave him good
wishes and encouragement. He turned at the grated door, to render the thanks
of his heart; it closed under the gaoler's hand; and the apparitions vanished

from his sight forever.
The wicket opened on a stone staircase, leading upward. When they had
ascended forty steps (the prisoner of half an hour already counted them), the
gaoler opened a low black door, and they passed into a solitary cell. It struck
cold and damp, but was not dark.
"Yours," said the gaoler.
"Why am I confined alone?"
"How do I know!"
"I can buy pen, ink, and paper?"
"Such are not my orders. You will be visited, and can ask then. At present, you
may buy your food, and nothing more."
There were in the cell, a chair, a table, and a straw mattress. As the gaoler
made a general inspection of these objects, and of the four walls, before going
out, a wandering fancy wandered through the mind of the prisoner leaning
against the wall opposite to him, that this gaoler was so unwholesomely
bloated, both in face and person, as to look like a man who had been drowned
and filled with water. When the gaoler was gone, he thought in the same
wandering way, "Now am I left, as if I were dead." Stopping then, to look
down at the mattress, he turned from it with a sick feeling, and thought, "And
here in these crawling creatures is the first condition of the body after death."
"Five paces by four and a half, five paces by four and a half, five paces by four
and a half." The prisoner walked to and fro in his cell, counting its
measurement, and the roar of the city arose like muffled drums with a wild
swell of voices added to them. "He made shoes, he made shoes, he made
shoes." The prisoner counted the measurement again, and paced faster, to draw
his mind with him from that latter repetition. "The ghosts that vanished when
the wicket closed. There was one among them, the appearance of a lady
dressed in black, who was leaning in the embrasure of a window, and she had
a light shining upon her golden hair, and she looked like * * * * Let us ride on
again, for God's sake, through the illuminated villages with the people all
awake! * * * * He made shoes, he made shoes, he made shoes. * * * * Five
paces by four and a half." With such scraps tossing and rolling upward from
the depths of his mind, the prisoner walked faster and faster, obstinately
counting and counting; and the roar of the city changed to this extentthat it still
rolled in like muffled drums, but with the wail of voices that he knew, in the
swell that rose above them.

II.
The Grindstone

Tellson's Bank, established in the Saint Germain Quarter of Paris, was in a
wing of a large house, approached by a courtyard and shut off from the street
by a high wall and a strong gate. The house belonged to a great nobleman who
had lived in it until he made a flight from the troubles, in his own cook's dress,
and got across the borders. A mere beast of the chase flying from hunters, he
was still in his metempsychosis no other than the same Monseigneur, the
preparation of whose chocolate for whose lips had once occupied three strong
men besides the cook in question.
Monseigneur gone, and the three strong men absolving themselves from the
sin of having drawn his high wages, by being more than ready and willing to
cut his throat on the altar of the dawning Republic one and indivisible of
Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, Monseigneur's house had been first
sequestrated, and then confiscated. For, all things moved so fast, and decree
followed decree with that fierce precipitation, that now upon the third night of
the autumn month of September, patriot emissaries of the law were in
possession of Monseigneur's house, and had marked it with the tricolour, and
were drinking brandy in its state apartments.
A place of business in London like Tellson's place of business in Paris, would
soon have driven the House out of its mind and into the Gazette. For, what
would staid British responsibility and respectability have said to orangetrees in
boxes in a Bank courtyard, and even to a Cupid over the counter? Yet such
things were. Tellson's had whitewashed the Cupid, but he was still to be seen
on the ceiling, in the coolest linen, aiming (as he very often does) at money
from morning to night. Bankruptcy must inevitably have come of this young
Pagan, in Lombardstreet, London, and also of a curtained alcove in the rear of
the immortal boy, and also of a lookingglass let into the wall, and also of
clerks not at all old, who danced in public on the slightest provocation. Yet, a
French Tellson's could get on with these things exceedingly well, and, as long
as the times held together, no man had taken fright at them, and drawn out his
money.
What money would be drawn out of Tellson's henceforth, and what would lie
there, lost and forgotten; what plate and jewels would tarnish in Tellson's
hidingplaces, while the depositors rusted in prisons, and when they should
have violently perished; how many accounts with Tellson's never to be

balanced in this world, must be carried over into the next; no man could have
said, that night, any more than Mr. Jarvis Lorry could, though he thought
heavily of these questions. He sat by a newlylighted wood fire (the blighted
and unfruitful year was prematurely cold), and on his honest and courageous
face there was a deeper shade than the pendent lamp could throw, or any
object in the room distortedly reflecta shade of horror.
He occupied rooms in the Bank, in his fidelity to the House of which he had
grown to be a part, like strong rootivy. It chanced that they derived a kind of
security from the patriotic occupation of the main building, but the truehearted
old gentleman never calculated about that. All such circumstances were
indifferent to him, so that he did his duty. On the opposite side of the
courtyard, under a colonnade, was extensive standingfor carriageswhere,
indeed, some carriages of Monseigneur yet stood. Against two of the pillars
were fastened two great flaring flambeaux, and in the light of these, standing
out in the open air, was a large grindstone: a roughly mounted thing which
appeared to have hurriedly been brought there from some neighbouring
smithy, or other workshop. Rising and looking out of window at these
harmless objects, Mr. Lorry shivered, and retired to his seat by the fire. He had
opened, not only the glass window, but the lattice blind outside it, and he had
closed both again, and he shivered through his frame.
From the streets beyond the high wall and the strong gate, there came the
usual night hum of the city, with now and then an indescribable ring in it,
weird and unearthly, as if some unwonted sounds of a terrible nature were
going up to Heaven.
"Thank God," said Mr. Lorry, clasping his hands, "that no one near and dear to
me is in this dreadful town tonight. May He have mercy on all who are in
danger!"
Soon afterwards, the bell at the great gate sounded, and he thought, "They
have come back!" and sat listening. But, there was no loud irruption into the
courtyard, as he had expected, and he heard the gate clash again, and all was
quiet.
The nervousness and dread that were upon him inspired that vague uneasiness
respecting the Bank, which a great change would naturally awaken, with such
feelings roused. It was well guarded, and he got up to go among the trusty
people who were watching it, when his door suddenly opened, and two figures
rushed in, at sight of which he fell back in amazement.
Lucie and her father! Lucie with her arms stretched out to him, and with that
old look of earnestness so concentrated and intensified, that it seemed as

though it had been stamped upon her face expressly to give force and power to
it in this one passage of her life.
"What is this?" cried Mr. Lorry, breathless and confused. "What is the matter?
Lucie! Manette! What has happened? What has brought you here? What is it?"
With the look fixed upon him, in her paleness and wildness, she panted out in
his arms, imploringly, "O my dear friend! My husband!"
"Your husband, Lucie?"
"Charles."
"What of Charles?"
"Here.
"Here, in Paris?"
"Has been here some daysthree or fourI don't know how manyI can't collect
my thoughts. An errand of generosity brought him here unknown to us; he was
stopped at the barrier, and sent to prison."
The old man uttered an irrepressible cry. Almost at the same moment, the beg
of the great gate rang again, and a loud noise of feet and voices came pouring
into the courtyard.
"What is that noise?" said the Doctor, turning towards the window.
"Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry. "Don't look out! Manette, for your life, don't
touch the blind!"
The Doctor turned, with his hand upon the fastening of the window, and said,
with a cool, bold smile:
"My dear friend, I have a charmed life in this city. I have been a Bastille
prisoner. There is no patriot in Parisin Paris? In Francewho, knowing me to
have been a prisoner in the Bastille, would touch me, except to overwhelm me
with embraces, or carry me in triumph. My old pain has given me a power that
has brought us through the barrier, and gained us news of Charles there, and
brought us here. I knew it would be so; I knew I could help Charles out of all
danger; I told Lucie so.What is that noise?" His hand was again upon the
window.
"Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry, absolutely desperate. "No, Lucie, my dear, nor
you!" He got his arm round her, and held her. "Don't be so terrified, my love. I
solemnly swear to you that I know of no harm having happened to Charles;

that I had no suspicion even of his being in this fatal place. What prison is he
in?"
"La Force!"
"La Force! Lucie, my child, if ever you were brave and serviceable in your
lifeand you were always bothyou will compose yourself now, to do exactly as
I bid you; for more depends upon it than you can think, or I can say. There is
no help for you in any action on your part tonight; you cannot possibly stir out.
I say this, because what I must bid you to do for Charles's sake, is the hardest
thing to do of all. You must instantly be obedient, still, and quiet. You must let
me put you in a room at the back here. You must leave your father and me
alone for two minutes, and as there are Life and Death in the world you must
not delay."
"I will be submissive to you. I see in your face that you know I can do nothing
else than this. I know you are true."
The old man kissed her, and hurried her into his room, and turned the key;
then, came hurrying back to the Doctor, and opened the window and partly
opened the blind, and put his hand upon the Doctor's arm, and looked out with
him into the courtyard.
Looked out upon a throng of men and women: not enough in number, or near
enough, to fill the courtyard: not more than forty or fifty in all. The people in
possession of the house had let them in at the gate, and they had rushed in to
work at the grindstone; it had evidently been set up there for their purpose, as
in a convenient and retired spot.
But, such awful workers, and such awful work!
The grindstone had a double handle, and, turning at it madly were two men,
whose faces, as their long hair flapped back when the whirlings of the
grindstone brought their faces up, were more horrible and cruel than the
visages of the wildest savages in their most barbarous disguise. False
eyebrows and false moustaches were stuck upon them, and their hideous
countenances were all bloody and sweaty, and all awry with howling, and all
staring and glaring with beastly excitement and want of sleep. As these
ruffians turned and turned, their matted locks now flung forward over their
eyes, now flung backward over their necks, some women held wine to their
mouths that they might drink; and what with dropping blood, and what with
dropping wine, and what with the stream of sparks struck out of the stone, all
their wicked atmosphere seemed gore and fire. The eye could not detect one
creature in the group free from the smear of blood. Shouldering one another to
get next at the sharpeningstone, were men stripped to the waist, with the stain

all over their limbs and bodies; men in all sorts of rags, with the stain upon
those rags; men devilishly set off with spoils of women's lace and silk and
ribbon, with the stain dyeing those trifles through and through. Hatchets,
knives, bayonets, swords, all brought to be sharpened, were all red with it.
Some of the hacked swords were tied to the wrists of those who carried them,
with strips of linen and fragments of dress: ligatures various in kind, but all
deep of the one colour. And as the frantic wielders of these weapons snatched
them from the stream of sparks and tore away into the streets, the same red
hue was red in their frenzied eyes;eyes which any unbrutalised beholder would
have given twenty years of life, to petrify with a welldirected gun.
All this was seen in a moment, as the vision of a drowning man, or of any
human creature at any very great pass, could see a world if it were there. They
drew back from the window, and the Doctor looked for explanation in his
friend's ashy face.
"They are," Mr. Lorry whispered the words, glancing fearfully round at the
locked room, "murdering the prisoners. If you are sure of what you say; if you
really have the power you think you haveas I believe you havemake yourself
known to these devils, and get taken to La Force. It may be too late, I don't
know, but let it not be a minute later!"
Doctor Manette pressed his hand, hastened bareheaded out of the room, and
was in the courtyard when Mr. Lorry regained the blind.
His streaming white hair, his remarkable face, and the impetuous confidence
of his manner, as he put the weapons aside like water, carried him in an instant
to the heart of the concourse at the stone. For a few moments there was a
pause, and a hurry, and a murmur, and the unintelligible sound of his voice;
and then Mr. Lorry saw him, surrounded by all, and in the midst of a line of
twenty men long, all linked shoulder to shoulder, and hand to shoulder, hurried
out with cries of"Live the Bastille prisoner! Help for the Bastille prisoner's
kindred in La Force! Room for the Bastille prisoner in front there! Save the
prisoner Evremonde at La Force!" and a thousand answering shouts.
He closed the lattice again with a fluttering heart, closed the window and the
curtain, hastened to Lucie, and told her that her father was assisted by the
people, and gone in search of her husband. He found her child and Miss Pross
with her; but, it never occurred to him to be surprised by their appearance until
a long time afterwards, when he sat watching them in such quiet as the night
knew.
Lucie had, by that time, fallen into a stupor on the floor at his feet, clinging to
his hand. Miss Pross had laid the child down on his own bed, and her head had

gradually fallen on the pillow beside her pretty charge. O the long, long night,
with the moans of the poor wife! And O the long, long night, with no return of
her father and no tidings!
Twice more in the darkness the bell at the great gate sounded, and the irruption
was repeated, and the grindstone whirled and spluttered. "What is it?" cried
Lucie, affrighted. "Hush! The soldiers' swords are sharpened there," said Mr.
Lorry. "The place is national property now, and used as a kind of armoury, my
love."
Twice more in all; but, the last spell of work was feeble and fitful. Soon
afterwards the day began to dawn, and he softly detached himself from the
clasping hand, and cautiously looked out again. A man, so besmeared that he
might have been a sorely wounded soldier creeping back to consciousness on a
field of slain, was rising from the pavement by the side of the grindstone, and
looking about him with a vacant air. Shortly, this wornout murderer descried in
the imperfect light one of the carriages of Monseigneur, and, staggering to that
gorgeous vehicle, climbed in at the door, and shut himself up to take his rest
on its dainty cushions.
The great grindstone, Earth, had turned when Mr. Lorry looked out again, and
the sun was red on the courtyard. But, the lesser grindstone stood alone there
in the calm morning air, with a red upon it that the sun had never given, and
would never take away.

III.
The Shadow

One of the first considerations which arose in the business mind of Mr. Lorry
when business hours came round, was this:that he had no right to imperil
Tellson's by sheltering the wife of an emigrant prisoner under the Bank roof.
His own possessions, safety, life, he would have hazarded for Lucie and her
child, without a moment's demur; but the great trust he held was not his own,
and as to that business charge he was a strict man of business.
At first, his mind reverted to Defarge, and he thought of finding out the
wineshop again and taking counsel with its master in reference to the safest
dwellingplace in the distracted state of the city. But, the same consideration
that suggested him, repudiated him; he lived in the most violent Quarter, and
doubtless was influential there, and deep in its dangerous workings.

Noon coming, and the Doctor not returning, and every minute's delay tending
to compromise Tellson's, Mr. Lorry advised with Lucie. She said that her
father had spoken of hiring a lodging for a short term, in that Quarter, near the
Bankinghouse. As there was no business objection to this, and as he foresaw
that even if it were all well with Charles, and he were to be released, he could
not hope to leave the city, Mr. Lorry went out in quest of such a lodging, and
found a suitable one, high up in a removed bystreet where the closed blinds in
all the other windows of a high melancholy square of buildings marked
deserted homes.
To this lodging he at once removed Lucie and her child, and Miss Pross:
giving them what comfort he could, and much more than he had himself. He
left Jerry with them, as a figure to fill a doorway that would bear considerable
knocking on the head, and retained to his own occupations. A disturbed and
doleful mind he brought to bear upon them, and slowly and heavily the day
lagged on with him.
It wore itself out, and wore him out with it, until the Bank closed. He was
again alone in his room of the previous night, considering what to do next,
when he heard a foot upon the stair. In a few moments, a man stood in his
presence, who, with a keenly observant look at him, addressed him by his
name.
"Your servant," said Mr. Lorry. "Do you know me?"
He was a strongly made man with dark curling hair, from fortyfive to fifty
years of age. For answer he repeated, without any change of emphasis, the
words:
"Do you know me?"
"I have seen you somewhere."
"Perhaps at my wineshop?"
Much interested and agitated, Mr. Lorry said: "You come from Doctor
Manette?"
"Yes. I come from Doctor Manette."
"And what says he? What does he send me?"
Defarge gave into his anxious hand, an open scrap of paper. It bore the words
in the Doctor's writing:
"Charles is safe, but I cannot safely leave this place yet.

I have obtained the favour that the bearer has a short note
from Charles to his wife. Let the bearer see his wife."
It was dated from La Force, within an hour.
"Will you accompany me," said Mr. Lorry, joyfully relieved after reading this
note aloud, "to where his wife resides?"
"Yes," returned Defarge.
Scarcely noticing as yet, in what a curiously reserved and mechanical way
Defarge spoke, Mr. Lorry put on his hat and they went down into the
courtyard. There, they found two women; one, knitting.
"Madame Defarge, surely!" said Mr. Lorry, who had left her in exactly the
same attitude some seventeen years ago.
"It is she," observed her husband.
"Does Madame go with us?" inquired Mr. Lorry, seeing that she moved as they
moved.
"Yes. That she may be able to recognise the faces and know the persons. It is
for their safety."
Beginning to be struck by Defarge's manner, Mr. Lorry looked dubiously at
him, and led the way. Both the women followed; the second woman being The
Vengeance.
They passed through the intervening streets as quickly as they might, ascended
the staircase of the new domicile, were admitted by Jerry, and found Lucie
weeping, alone. She was thrown into a transport by the tidings Mr. Lorry gave
her of her husband, and clasped the hand that delivered his notelittle thinking
what it had been doing near him in the night, and might, but for a chance, have
done to him.
"DEAREST,Take courage. I am well, and your father has
influence around me. You cannot answer this.
Kiss our child for me."
That was all the writing. It was so much, however, to her who received it, that
she turned from Defarge to his wife, and kissed one of the hands that knitted.
It was a passionate, loving, thankful, womanly action, but the hand made no
responsedropped cold and heavy, and took to its knitting again.

There was something in its touch that gave Lucie a check. She stopped in the
act of putting the note in her bosom, and, with her hands yet at her neck,
looked terrified at Madame Defarge. Madame Defarge met the lifted eyebrows
and forehead with a cold, impassive stare.
"My dear," said Mr. Lorry, striking in to explain; "there are frequent risings in
the streets; and, although it is not likely they will ever trouble you, Madame
Defarge wishes to see those whom she has the power to protect at such times,
to the end that she may know themthat she may identify them. I believe," said
Mr. Lorry, rather halting in his reassuring words, as the stony manner of all the
three impressed itself upon him more and more, "I state the case, Citizen
Defarge?"
Defarge looked gloomily at his wife, and gave no other answer than a gruff
sound of acquiescence.
"You had better, Lucie," said Mr. Lorry, doing all he could to propitiate, by
tone and manner, "have the dear child here, and our good Pross. Our good
Pross, Defarge, is an English lady, and knows no French."
The lady in question, whose rooted conviction that she was more than a match
for any foreigner, was not to be shaken by distress and, danger, appeared with
folded arms, and observed in English to The Vengeance, whom her eyes first
encountered, "Well, I am sure, Boldface! I hope you are pretty well!" She also
bestowed a British cough on Madame Defarge; but, neither of the two took
much heed of her.
"Is that his child?" said Madame Defarge, stopping in her work for the first
time, and pointing her knittingneedle at little Lucie as if it were the finger of
Fate.
"Yes, madame," answered Mr. Lorry; "this is our poor prisoner's darling
daughter, and only child."
The shadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed to fall so
threatening and dark on the child, that her mother instinctively kneeled on the
ground beside her, and held her to her breast. The shadow attendant on
Madame Defarge and her party seemed then to fall, threatening and dark, on
both the mother and the child.
"It is enough, my husband," said Madame Defarge. "I have seen them. We
may go."
But, the suppressed manner had enough of menace in itnot visible and
presented, but indistinct and withheldto alarm Lucie into saying, as she laid

her appealing hand on Madame Defarge's dress:
"You will be good to my poor husband. You will do him no harm. You will
help me to see him if you can?"
"Your husband is not my business here," returned Madame Defarge, looking
down at her with perfect composure. "It is the daughter of your father who is
my business here."
"For my sake, then, be merciful to my husband. For my child's sake! She will
put her hands together and pray you to be merciful. We are more afraid of you
than of these others."
Madame Defarge received it as a compliment, and looked at her husband.
Defarge, who had been uneasily biting his thumbnail and looking at her,
collected his face into a sterner expression.
"What is it that your husband says in that little letter?" asked Madame
Defarge, with a lowering smile. "Influence; he says something touching
influence?"
"That my father," said Lucie, hurriedly taking the paper from her breast, but
with her alarmed eyes on her questioner and not on it, "has much influence
around him."
"Surely it will release him!" said Madame Defarge. "Let it do so."
"As a wife and mother," cried Lucie, most earnestly, "I implore you to have
pity on me and not to exercise any power that you possess, against my
innocent husband, but to use it in his behalf. O sisterwoman, think of me. As a
wife and mother!"
Madame Defarge looked, coldly as ever, at the suppliant, and said, turning to
her friend The Vengeance:
"The wives and mothers we have been used to see, since we were as little as
this child, and much less, have not been greatly considered? We have known
their husbands and fathers laid in prison and kept from them, often enough?
All our lives, we have seen our sisterwomen suffer, in themselves and in their
children, poverty, nakedness, hunger, thirst, sickness, misery, oppression and
neglect of all kinds?"
"We have seen nothing else," returned The Vengeance.
"We have borne this a long time," said Madame Defarge, turning her eyes
again upon Lucie. "Judge you! Is it likely that the trouble of one wife and

mother would be much to us now?"
She resumed her knitting and went out. The Vengeance followed. Defarge
went last, and closed the door.
"Courage, my dear Lucie," said Mr. Lorry, as he raised her. "Courage,
courage! So far all goes well with usmuch, much better than it has of late gone
with many poor souls. Cheer up, and have a thankful heart."
"I am not thankless, I hope, but that dreadful woman seems to throw a shadow
on me and on all my hopes."
"Tut, tut!" said Mr. Lorry; "what is this despondency in the brave little breast?
A shadow indeed! No substance in it, Lucie."
But the shadow of the manner of these Defarges was dark upon himself, for all
that, and in his secret mind it troubled him greatly.

IV.
Calm in Storm

Doctor Manette did not return until the morning of the fourth day of his
absence. So much of what had happened in that dreadful time as could be kept
from the knowledge of Lucie was so well concealed from her, that not until
long afterwards, when France and she were far apart, did she know that eleven
hundred defenceless prisoners of both sexes and all ages had been killed by
the populace; that four days and nights had been darkened by this deed of
horror; and that the air around her had been tainted by the slain. She only
knew that there had been an attack upon the prisons, that all political prisoners
had been in danger, and that some had been dragged out by the crowd and
murdered.
To Mr. Lorry, the Doctor communicated under an injunction of secrecy on
which he had no need to dwell, that the crowd had taken him through a scene
of carnage to the prison of La Force. That, in the prison he had found a
selfappointed Tribunal sitting, before which the prisoners were brought singly,
and by which they were rapidly ordered to be put forth to be massacred, or to
be released, or (in a few cases) to be sent back to their cells. That, presented
by his conductors to this Tribunal, he had announced himself by name and
profession as having been for eighteen years a secret and unaccused prisoner

in the Bastille; that, one of the body so sitting in judgment had risen and
identified him, and that this man was Defarge.
That, hereupon he had ascertained, through the registers on the table, that his
soninlaw was among the living prisoners, and had pleaded hard to the
Tribunalof whom some members were asleep and some awake, some dirty
with murder and some clean, some sober and some notfor his life and liberty.
That, in the first frantic greetings lavished on himself as a notable sufferer
under the overthrown system, it had been accorded to him to have Charles
Darnay brought before the lawless Court, and examined. That, he seemed on
the point of being at once released, when the tide in his favour met with some
unexplained check (not intelligible to the Doctor), which led to a few words of
secret conference. That, the man sitting as President had then informed Doctor
Manette that the prisoner must remain in custody, but should, for his sake, be
held inviolate in safe custody. That, immediately, on a signal, the prisoner was
removed to the interior of the prison again; but, that he, the Doctor, had then
so strongly pleaded for permission to remain and assure himself that his
soninlaw was, through no malice or mischance, delivered to the concourse
whose murderous yells outside the gate had often drowned the proceedings,
that he had obtained the permission, and had remained in that Hall of Blood
until the danger was over.
The sights he had seen there, with brief snatches of food and sleep by
intervals, shall remain untold. The mad joy over the prisoners who were saved,
had astounded him scarcely less than the mad ferocity against those who were
cut to pieces. One prisoner there was, he said, who had been discharged into
the street free, but at whom a mistaken savage had thrust a pike as he passed
out. Being besought to go to him and dress the wound, the Doctor had passed
out at the same gate, and had found him in the arms of a company of
Samaritans, who were seated on the bodies of their victims. With an
inconsistency as monstrous as anything in this awful nightmare, they had
helped the healer, and tended the wounded man with the gentlest solicitudehad
made a litter for him and escorted him carefully from the spothad then caught
up their weapons and plunged anew into a butchery so dreadful, that the
Doctor had covered his eyes with his hands, and swooned away in the midst of
it.
As Mr. Lorry received these confidences, and as he watched the face of his
friend now sixtytwo years of age, a misgiving arose within him that such dread
experiences would revive the old danger.
But, he had never seen his friend in his present aspect: he had never at all
known him in his present character. For the first time the Doctor felt, now, that
his suffering was strength and power. For the first time he felt that in that

sharp fire, he had slowly forged the iron which could break the prison door of
his daughter's husband, and deliver him. "It all tended to a good end, my
friend; it was not mere waste and ruin. As my beloved child was helpful in
restoring me to myself, I will be helpful now in restoring the dearest part of
herself to her; by the aid of Heaven I will do it!" Thus, Doctor Manette. And
when Jarvis Lorry saw the kindled eyes, the resolute face, the calm strong look
and bearing of the man whose life always seemed to him to have been
stopped, like a clock, for so many years, and then set going again with an
energy which had lain dormant during the cessation of its usefulness, he
believed.
Greater things than the Doctor had at that time to contend with, would have
yielded before his persevering purpose. While he kept himself in his place, as
a physician, whose business was with all degrees of mankind, bond and free,
rich and poor, bad and good, he used his personal influence so wisely, that he
was soon the inspecting physician of three prisons, and among them of La
Force. He could now assure Lucie that her husband was no longer confined
alone, but was mixed with the general body of prisoners; he saw her husband
weekly, and brought sweet messages to her, straight from his lips; sometimes
her husband himself sent a letter to her (though never by the Doctor's hand),
but she was not permitted to write to him: for, among the many wild
suspicions of plots in the prisons, the wildest of all pointed at emigrants who
were known to have made friends or permanent connections abroad.
This new life of the Doctor's was an anxious life, no doubt; still, the sagacious
Mr. Lorry saw that there was a new sustaining pride in it. Nothing unbecoming
tinged the pride; it was a natural and worthy one; but he observed it as a
curiosity. The Doctor knew, that up to that time, his imprisonment had been
associated in the minds of his daughter and his friend, with his personal
affliction, deprivation, and weakness. Now that this was changed, and he knew
himself to be invested through that old trial with forces to which they both
looked for Charles's ultimate safety and deliverance, he became so far exalted
by the change, that he took the lead and direction, and required them as the
weak, to trust to him as the strong. The preceding relative positions of himself
and Lucie were reversed, yet only as the liveliest gratitude and affection could
reverse them, for he could have had no pride but in rendering some service to
her who had rendered so much to him. "All curious to see," thought Mr. Lorry,
in his amiably shrewd way, "but all natural and right; so, take the lead, my
dear friend, and keep it; it couldn't be in better hands."
But, though the Doctor tried hard, and never ceased trying, to get Charles
Darnay set at liberty, or at least to get him brought to trial, the public current
of the time set too strong and fast for him. The new era began; the king was

tried, doomed, and beheaded; the Republic of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or
Death, declared for victory or death against the world in arms; the black flag
waved night and day from the great towers of Notre Dame; three hundred
thousand men, summoned to rise against the tyrants of the earth, rose from all
the varying soils of France, as if the dragon's teeth had been sown broadcast,
and had yielded fruit equally on hill and plain, on rock, in gravel, and alluvial
mud, under the bright sky of the South and under the clouds of the North, in
fell and forest, in the vineyards and the olivegrounds and among the cropped
grass and the stubble of the corn, along the fruitful banks of the broad rivers,
and in the sand of the seashore. What private solicitude could rear itself
against the deluge of the Year One of Libertythe deluge rising from below, not
falling from above, and with the windows of Heaven shut, not opened!
There was no pause, no pity, no peace, no interval of relenting rest, no
measurement of time. Though days and nights circled as regularly as when
time was young, and the evening and morning were the first day, other count
of time there was none. Hold of it was lost in the raging fever of a nation, as it
is in the fever of one patient. Now, breaking the unnatural silence of a whole
city, the executioner showed the people the head of the kingand now, it
seemed almost in the same breath, the head of his fair wife which had had
eight weary months of imprisoned widowhood and misery, to turn it grey.
And yet, observing the strange law of contradiction which obtains in all such
cases, the time was long, while it flamed by so fast. A revolutionary tribunal in
the capital, and forty or fifty thousand revolutionary committees all over the
land; a law of the Suspected, which struck away all security for liberty or life,
and delivered over any good and innocent person to any bad and guilty one;
prisons gorged with people who had committed no offence, and could obtain
no hearing; these things became the established order and nature of appointed
things, and seemed to be ancient usage before they were many weeks old.
Above all, one hideous figure grew as familiar as if it had been before the
general gaze from the foundations of the worldthe figure of the sharp female
called La Guillotine.
It was the popular theme for jests; it was the best cure for headache, it
infallibly prevented the hair from turning grey, it imparted a peculiar delicacy
to the complexion, it was the National Razor which shaved close: who kissed
La Guillotine, looked through the little window and sneezed into the sack. It
was the sign of the regeneration of the human race. It superseded the Cross.
Models of it were worn on breasts from which the Cross was discarded, and it
was bowed down to and believed in where the Cross was denied.
It sheared off heads so many, that it, and the ground it most polluted, were a
rotten red. It was taken to pieces, like a toypuzzle for a young Devil, and was

put together again when the occasion wanted it. It hushed the eloquent, struck
down the powerful, abolished the beautiful and good. Twentytwo friends of
high public mark, twentyone living and one dead, it had lopped the heads off,
in one morning, in as many minutes. The name of the strong man of Old
Scripture had descended to the chief functionary who worked it; but, so armed,
he was stronger than his namesake, and blinder, and tore away the gates of
God's own Temple every day.
Among these terrors, and the brood belonging to them, the Doctor walked with
a steady head: confident in his power, cautiously persistent in his end, never
doubting that he would save Lucie's husband at last. Yet the current of the time
swept by, so strong and deep, and carried the time away so fiercely, that
Charles had lain in prison one year and three months when the Doctor was
thus steady and confident. So much more wicked and distracted had the
Revolution grown in that December month, that the rivers of the South were
encumbered with the bodies of the violently drowned by night, and prisoners
were shot in lines and squares under the southern wintry sun. Still, the Doctor
walked among the terrors with a steady head. No man better known than he, in
Paris at that day; no man in a stranger situation. Silent, humane, indispensable
in hospital and prison, using his art equally among assassins and victims, he
was a man apart. In the exercise of his skill, the appearance and the story of
the Bastille Captive removed him from all other men. He was not suspected or
brought in question, any more than if he had indeed been recalled to life some
eighteen years before, or were a Spirit moving among mortals.

V.
The WoodSawyer

One year and three months. During all that time Lucie was never sure, from
hour to hour, but that the Guillotine would strike off her husband's head next
day. Every day, through the stony streets, the tumbrils now jolted heavily,
filled with Condemned. Lovely girls; bright women, brownhaired,
blackhaired, and grey; youths; stalwart men and old; gentle born and peasant
born; all red wine for La Guillotine, all daily brought into light from the dark
cellars of the loathsome prisons, and carried to her through the streets to slake
her devouring thirst. Liberty, equality, fraternity, or death;the last, much the
easiest to bestow, O Guillotine!
If the suddenness of her calamity, and the whirling wheels of the time, had

stunned the Doctor's daughter into awaiting the result in idle despair, it would
but have been with her as it was with many. But, from the hour when she had
taken the white head to her fresh young bosom in the garret of Saint Antoine,
she had been true to her duties. She was truest to them in the season of trial, as
all the quietly loyal and good will always be.
As soon as they were established in their new residence, and her father had
entered on the routine of his avocations, she arranged the little household as
exactly as if her husband had been there. Everything had its appointed place
and its appointed time. Little Lucie she taught, as regularly, as if they had all
been united in their English home. The slight devices with which she cheated
herself into the show of a belief that they would soon be reunitedthe little
preparations for his speedy return, the setting aside of his chair and his
booksthese, and the solemn prayer at night for one dear prisoner especially,
among the many unhappy souls in prison and the shadow of deathwere almost
the only outspoken reliefs of her heavy mind.
She did not greatly alter in appearance. The plain dark dresses, akin to
mourning dresses, which she and her child wore, were as neat and as well
attended to as the brighter clothes of happy days. She lost her colour, and the
old and intent expression was a constant, not an occasional, thing; otherwise,
she remained very pretty and comely. Sometimes, at night on kissing her
father, she would burst into the grief she had repressed all day, and would say
that her sole reliance, under Heaven, was on him. He always resolutely
answered: "Nothing can happen to him without my knowledge, and I know
that I can save him, Lucie."
They had not made the round of their changed life many weeks, when her
father said to her, on coming home one evening:
"My dear, there is an upper window in the prison, to which Charles can
sometimes gain access at three in the afternoon. When he can get to itwhich
depends on many uncertainties and incidentshe might see you in the street, he
thinks, if you stood in a certain place that I can show you. But you will not be
able to see him, my poor child, and even if you could, it would be unsafe for
you to make a sign of recognition."
"O show me the place, my father, and I will go there every day."
From that time, in all weathers, she waited there two hours. As the clock
struck two, she was there, and at four she turned resignedly away. When it was
not too wet or inclement for her child to be with her, they went together; at
other times she was alone; but, she never missed a single day.
It was the dark and dirty corner of a small winding street. The hovel of a cutter

of wood into lengths for burning, was the only house at that end; all else was
wall. On the third day of her being there, he noticed her.
"Good day, citizeness."
"Good day, citizen."
This mode of address was now prescribed by decree. It had been established
voluntarily some time ago, among the more thorough patriots; but, was now
law for everybody.
"Walking here again, citizeness?"
"You see me, citizen!"
The woodsawyer, who was a little man with a redundancy of gesture (he had
once been a mender of roads), cast a glance at the prison, pointed at the prison,
and putting his ten fingers before his face to represent bars, peeped through
them jocosely.
"But it's not my business," said he. And went on sawing his wood.
Next day he was looking out for her, and accosted her the moment she
appeared.
"What? Walking here again, citizeness?"
"Yes, citizen."
"Ah! A child too! Your mother, is it not, my little citizeness?"
"Do I say yes, mamma?" whispered little Lucie, drawing close to her.
"Yes, dearest."
"Yes, citizen."
"Ah! But it's not my business. My work is my business. See my saw! I call it
my Little Guillotine. La, la, la; La, la, la! And off his head comes!"
The billet fell as he spoke, and he threw it into a basket.
"I call myself the Samson of the firewood guillotine. See here again! Loo, loo,
loo; Loo, loo, loo! And off her head comes! Now, a child. Tickle, tickle;
Pickle, pickle! And off its head comes. All the family!"
Lucie shuddered as he threw two more billets into his basket, but it was
impossible to be there while the woodsawyer was at work, and not be in his

sight. Thenceforth, to secure his good will, she always spoke to him first, and
often gave him drinkmoney, which he readily received.
He was an inquisitive fellow, and sometimes when she had quite forgotten him
in gazing at the prison roof and grates, and in lifting her heart up to her
husband, she would come to herself to find him looking at her, with his knee
on his bench and his saw stopped in its work. "But it's not my business!" he
would generally say at those times, and would briskly fall to his sawing again.
In all weathers, in the snow and frost of winter, in the bitter winds of spring, in
the hot sunshine of summer, in the rains of autumn, and again in the snow and
frost of winter, Lucie passed two hours of every day at this place; and every
day on leaving it, she kissed the prison wall. Her husband saw her (so she
learned from her father) it might be once in five or six times: it might be twice
or thrice running: it might be, not for a week or a fortnight together. It was
enough that he could and did see her when the chances served, and on that
possibility she would have waited out the day, seven days a week.
These occupations brought her round to the December month, wherein her
father walked among the terrors with a steady head. On a lightlysnowing
afternoon she arrived at the usual corner. It was a day of some wild rejoicing,
and a festival. She had seen the houses, as she came along, decorated with
little pikes, and with little red caps stuck upon them; also, with tricoloured
ribbons; also, with the standard inscription (tricoloured letters were the
favourite), Republic One and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or
Death!
The miserable shop of the woodsawyer was so small, that its whole surface
furnished very indifferent space for this legend. He had got somebody to
scrawl it up for him, however, who had squeezed Death in with most
inappropriate difficulty. On his housetop, he displayed pike and cap, as a good
citizen must, and in a window he had stationed his saw inscribed as his "Little
Sainte Guillotine"for the great sharp female was by that time popularly
canonised. His shop was shut and he was not there, which was a relief to
Lucie, and left her quite alone.
But, he was not far off, for presently she heard a troubled movement and a
shouting coming along, which filled her with fear. A moment afterwards, and a
throng of people came pouring round the corner by the prison wall, in the
midst of whom was the woodsawyer hand in hand with The Vengeance. There
could not be fewer than five hundred people, and they were dancing like five
thousand demons. There was no other music than their own singing. They
danced to the popular Revolution song, keeping a ferocious time that was like
a gnashing of teeth in unison. Men and women danced together, women

danced together, men danced together, as hazard had brought them together.
At first, they were a mere storm of coarse red caps and coarse woollen rags;
but, as they filled the place, and stopped to dance about Lucie, some ghastly
apparition of a dancefigure gone raving mad arose among them. They
advanced, retreated, struck at one another's hands, clutched at one another's
heads, spun round alone, caught one another and spun round in pairs, until
many of them dropped. While those were down, the rest linked hand in hand,
and all spun round together: then the ring broke, and in separate rings of two
and four they turned and turned until they all stopped at once, began again,
struck, clutched, and tore, and then reversed the spin, and all spun round
another way. Suddenly they stopped again, paused, struck out the time afresh,
formed into lines the width of the public way, and, with their heads low down
and their hands high up, swooped screaming off. No fight could have been
half so terrible as this dance. It was so emphatically a fallen sporta something,
once innocent, delivered over to all devilrya healthy pastime changed into a
means of angering the blood, bewildering the senses, and steeling the heart.
Such grace as was visible in it, made it the uglier, showing how warped and
perverted all things good by nature were become. The maidenly bosom bared
to this, the pretty almostchild's head thus distracted, the delicate foot mincing
in this slough of blood and dirt, were types of the disjointed time.
This was the Carmagnole. As it passed, leaving Lucie frightened and
bewildered in the doorway of the woodsawyer's house, the feathery snow fell
as quietly and lay as white and soft, as if it had never been.
"O my father!" for he stood before her when she lifted up the eyes she had
momentarily darkened with her hand; "such a cruel, bad sight."
"I know, my dear, I know. I have seen it many times. Don't be frightened! Not
one of them would harm you."
"I am not frightened for myself, my father. But when I think of my husband,
and the mercies of these people"
"We will set him above their mercies very soon. I left him climbing to the
window, and I came to tell you. There is no one here to see. You may kiss your
hand towards that highest shelving roof."
"I do so, father, and I send him my Soul with it!"
"You cannot see him, my poor dear?"
"No, father," said Lucie, yearning and weeping as she kissed her hand, "no."
A footstep in the snow. Madame Defarge. "I salute you, citizeness," from the

Doctor. "I salute you, citizen." This in passing. Nothing more. Madame
Defarge gone, like a shadow over the white road.
"Give me your arm, my love. Pass from here with an air of cheerfulness and
courage, for his sake. That was well done;" they had left the spot; "it shall not
be in vain. Charles is summoned for tomorrow."
"For tomorrow!"
"There is no time to lose. I am well prepared, but there are precautions to be
taken, that could not be taken until he was actually summoned before the
Tribunal. He has not received the notice yet, but I know that he will presently
be summoned for tomorrow, and removed to the Conciergerie; I have timely
information. You are not afraid?"
She could scarcely answer, "I trust in you."
"Do so, implicitly. Your suspense is nearly ended, my darling; he shall be
restored to you within a few hours; I have encompassed him with every
protection. I must see Lorry."
He stopped. There was a heavy lumbering of wheels within hearing. They both
knew too well what it meant. One. Two. Three. Three tumbrils faring away
with their dread loads over the hushing snow.
"I must see Lorry," the Doctor repeated, turning her another way.
The staunch old gentleman was still in his trust; had never left it. He and his
books were in frequent requisition as to property confiscated and made
national. What he could save for the owners, he saved. No better man living to
hold fast by what Tellson's had in keeping, and to hold his peace.
A murky red and yellow sky, and a rising mist from the Seine, denoted the
approach of darkness. It was almost dark when they arrived at the Bank. The
stately residence of Monseigneur was altogether blighted and deserted. Above
a heap of dust and ashes in the court, ran the letters: National Property.
Republic One and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!
Who could that be with Mr. Lorrythe owner of the ridingcoat upon the
chairwho must not be seen? From whom newly arrived, did he come out,
agitated and surprised, to take his favourite in his arms? To whom did he
appear to repeat her faltering words, when, raising his voice and turning his
head towards the door of the room from which he had issued, he said:
"Removed to the Conciergerie, and summoned for tomorrow?"

VI.
Triumph

The dread tribunal of five Judges, Public Prosecutor, and determined Jury, sat
every day. Their lists went forth every evening, and were read out by the
gaolers of the various prisons to their prisoners. The standard gaolerjoke was,
"Come out and listen to the Evening Paper, you inside there!"
"Charles Evremonde, called Darnay!"
So at last began the Evening Paper at La Force.
When a name was called, its owner stepped apart into a spot reserved for those
who were announced as being thus fatally recorded. Charles Evremonde,
called Darnay, had reason to know the usage; he had seen hundreds pass away
so.
His bloated gaoler, who wore spectacles to read with, glanced over them to
assure himself that he had taken his place, and went through the list, making a
similar short pause at each name. There were twentythree names, but only
twenty were responded to; for one of the prisoners so summoned had died in
gaol and been forgotten, and two had already been guillotined and forgotten.
The list was read, in the vaulted chamber where Darnay had seen the
associated prisoners on the night of his arrival. Every one of those had
perished in the massacre; every human creature he had since cared for and
parted with, had died on the scaffold.
There were hurried words of farewell and kindness, but the parting was soon
over. It was the incident of every day, and the society of La Force were
engaged in the preparation of some games of forfeits and a little concert, for
that evening. They crowded to the grates and shed tears there; but, twenty
places in the projected entertainments had to be refilled, and the time was, at
best, short to the lockup hour, when the common rooms and corridors would
be delivered over to the great dogs who kept watch there through the night.
The prisoners were far from insensible or unfeeling; their ways arose out of
the condition of the time. Similarly, though with a subtle difference, a species
of fervour or intoxication, known, without doubt, to have led some persons to
brave the guillotine unnecessarily, and to die by it, was not mere boastfulness,
but a wild infection of the wildly shaken public mind. In seasons of pestilence,
some of us will have a secret attraction to the diseasea terrible passing
inclination to die of it. And all of us have like wonders hidden in our breasts,

only needing circumstances to evoke them.
The passage to the Conciergerie was short and dark; the night in its
verminhaunted cells was long and cold. Next day, fifteen prisoners were put to
the bar before Charles Darnay's name was called. All the fifteen were
condemned, and the trials of the whole occupied an hour and a half.
"Charles Evremonde, called Darnay," was at length arraigned.
His judges sat upon the Bench in feathered hats; but the rough red cap and
tricoloured cockade was the headdress otherwise prevailing. Looking at the
Jury and the turbulent audience, he might have thought that the usual order of
things was reversed, and that the felons were trying the honest men. The
lowest, cruelest, and worst populace of a city, never without its quantity of
low, cruel, and bad, were the directing spirits of the scene: noisily
commenting, applauding, disapproving, anticipating, and precipitating the
result, without a check. Of the men, the greater part were armed in various
ways; of the women, some wore knives, some daggers, some ate and drank as
they looked on, many knitted. Among these last, was one, with a spare piece
of knitting under her arm as she worked. She was in a front row, by the side of
a man whom he had never seen since his arrival at the Barrier, but whom he
directly remembered as Defarge. He noticed that she once or twice whispered
in his ear, and that she seemed to be his wife; but, what he most noticed in the
two figures was, that although they were posted as close to himself as they
could be, they never looked towards him. They seemed to be waiting for
something with a dogged determination, and they looked at the Jury, but at
nothing else. Under the President sat Doctor Manette, in his usual quiet dress.
As well as the prisoner could see, he and Mr. Lorry were the only men there,
unconnected with the Tribunal, who wore their usual clothes, and had not
assumed the coarse garb of the Carmagnole.
Charles Evremonde, called Darnay, was accused by the public prosecutor as
an emigrant, whose life was forfeit to the Republic, under the decree which
banished all emigrants on pain of Death. It was nothing that the decree bore
date since his return to France. There he was, and there was the decree; he had
been taken in France, and his head was demanded.
"Take off his head!" cried the audience. "An enemy to the Republic!"
The President rang his bell to silence those cries, and asked the prisoner
whether it was not true that he had lived many years in England?
Undoubtedly it was.
Was he not an emigrant then? What did he call himself?

Not an emigrant, he hoped, within the sense and spirit of the law.
Why not? the President desired to know.
Because he had voluntarily relinquished a title that was distasteful to him, and
a station that was distasteful to him, and had left his countryhe submitted
before the word emigrant in the present acceptation by the Tribunal was in
useto live by his own industry in England, rather than on the industry of the
overladen people of France.
What proof had he of this?
He handed in the names of two witnesses; Theophile Gabelle, and Alexandre
Manette.
But he had married in England? the President reminded him.
True, but not an English woman.
A citizeness of France?
Yes. By birth.
Her name and family?
"Lucie Manette, only daughter of Doctor Manette, the good physician who sits
there."
This answer had a happy effect upon the audience. Cries in exaltation of the
wellknown good physician rent the hall. So capriciously were the people
moved, that tears immediately rolled down several ferocious countenances
which had been glaring at the prisoner a moment before, as if with impatience
to pluck him out into the streets and kill him.
On these few steps of his dangerous way, Charles Darnay had set his foot
according to Doctor Manette's reiterated instructions. The same cautious
counsel directed every step that lay before him, and had prepared every inch of
his road.
The President asked, why had he returned to France when he did, and not
sooner?
He had not returned sooner, he replied, simply because he had no means of
living in France, save those he had resigned; whereas, in England, he lived by
giving instruction in the French language and literature. He had returned when
he did, on the pressing and written entreaty of a French citizen, who
represented that his life was endangered by his absence. He had come back, to

save a citizen's life, and to bear his testimony, at whatever personal hazard, to
the truth. Was that criminal in the eyes of the Republic?
The populace cried enthusiastically, "No!" and the President rang his bell to
quiet them. Which it did not, for they continued to cry "No!" until they left off,
of their own will.
The President required the name of that citizen. The accused explained that the
citizen was his first witness. He also referred with confidence to the citizen's
letter, which had been taken from him at the Barrier, but which he did not
doubt would be found among the papers then before the President.
The Doctor had taken care that it should be therehad assured him that it would
be thereand at this stage of the proceedings it was produced and read. Citizen
Gabelle was called to confirm it, and did so. Citizen Gabelle hinted, with
infinite delicacy and politeness, that in the pressure of business imposed on the
Tribunal by the multitude of enemies of the Republic with which it had to
deal, he had been slightly overlooked in his prison of the Abbayein fact, had
rather passed out of the Tribunal's patriotic remembranceuntil three days ago;
when he had been summoned before it, and had been set at liberty on the
Jury's declaring themselves satisfied that the accusation against him was
answered, as to himself, by the surrender of the citizen Evremonde, called
Darnay.
Doctor Manette was next questioned. His high personal popularity, and the
clearness of his answers, made a great impression; but, as he proceeded, as he
showed that the Accused was his first friend on his release from his long
imprisonment; that, the accused had remained in England, always faithful and
devoted to his daughter and himself in their exile; that, so far from being in
favour with the Aristocrat government there, he had actually been tried for his
life by it, as the foe of England and friend of the United Statesas he brought
these circumstances into view, with the greatest discretion and with the
straightforward force of truth and earnestness, the Jury and the populace
became one. At last, when he appealed by name to Monsieur Lorry, an English
gentleman then and there present, who, like himself, had been a witness on
that English trial and could corroborate his account of it, the Jury declared that
they had heard enough, and that they were ready with their votes if the
President were content to receive them.
At every vote (the Jurymen voted aloud and individually), the populace set up
a shout of applause. All the voices were in the prisoner's favour, and the
President declared him free.
Then, began one of those extraordinary scenes with which the populace

sometimes gratified their fickleness, or their better impulses towards
generosity and mercy, or which they regarded as some setoff against their
swollen account of cruel rage. No man can decide now to which of these
motives such extraordinary scenes were referable; it is probable, to a blending
of all the three, with the second predominating. No sooner was the acquittal
pronounced, than tears were shed as freely as blood at another time, and such
fraternal embraces were bestowed upon the prisoner by as many of both sexes
as could rush at him, that after his long and unwholesome confinement he was
in danger of fainting from exhaustion; none the less because he knew very
well, that the very same people, carried by another current, would have rushed
at him with the very same intensity, to rend him to pieces and strew him over
the streets.
His removal, to make way for other accused persons who were to be tried,
rescued him from these caresses for the moment. Five were to be tried
together, next, as enemies of the Republic, forasmuch as they had not assisted
it by word or deed. So quick was the Tribunal to compensate itself and the
nation for a chance lost, that these five came down to him before he left the
place, condemned to die within twentyfour hours. The first of them told him
so, with the customary prison sign of Deatha raised fingerand they all added in
words, "Long live the Republic!"
The five had had, it is true, no audience to lengthen their proceedings, for
when he and Doctor Manette emerged from the gate, there was a great crowd
about it, in which there seemed to be every face he had seen in Courtexcept
two, for which he looked in vain. On his coming out, the concourse made at
him anew, weeping, embracing, and shouting, all by turns and all together,
until the very tide of the river on the bank of which the mad scene was acted,
seemed to run mad, like the people on the shore.
They put him into a great chair they had among them, and which they had
taken either out of the Court itself, or one of its rooms or passages. Over the
chair they had thrown a red flag, and to the back of it they had bound a pike
with a red cap on its top. In this car of triumph, not even the Doctor's
entreaties could prevent his being carried to his home on men's shoulders, with
a confused sea of red caps heaving about him, and casting up to sight from the
stormy deep such wrecks of faces, that he more than once misdoubted his
mind being in confusion, and that he was in the tumbril on his way to the
Guillotine.
In wild dreamlike procession, embracing whom they met and pointing him
out, they carried him on. Reddening the snowy streets with the prevailing
Republican colour, in winding and tramping through them, as they had
reddened them below the snow with a deeper dye, they carried him thus into

the courtyard of the building where he lived. Her father had gone on before, to
prepare her, and when her husband stood upon his feet, she dropped insensible
in his arms.
As he held her to his heart and turned her beautiful head between his face and
the brawling crowd, so that his tears and her lips might come together unseen,
a few of the people fell to dancing. Instantly, all the rest fell to dancing, and
the courtyard overflowed with the Carmagnole. Then, they elevated into the
vacant chair a young woman from the crowd to be carried as the Goddess of
Liberty, and then swelling and overflowing out into the adjacent streets, and
along the river's bank, and over the bridge, the Carmagnole absorbed them
every one and whirled them away.
After grasping the Doctor's hand, as he stood victorious and proud before him;
after grasping the hand of Mr. Lorry, who came panting in breathless from his
struggle against the waterspout of the Carmagnole; after kissing little Lucie,
who was lifted up to clasp her arms round his neck; and after embracing the
ever zealous and faithful Pross who lifted her; he took his wife in his arms,
and carried her up to their rooms.
"Lucie! My own! I am safe."
"O dearest Charles, let me thank God for this on my knees as I have prayed to
Him."
They all reverently bowed their heads and hearts. When she was again in his
arms, he said to her:
"And now speak to your father, dearest. No other man in all this France could
have done what he has done for me."
She laid her head upon her father's breast, as she had laid his poor head on her
own breast, long, long ago. He was happy in the return he had made her, he
was recompensed for his suffering, he was proud of his strength. "You must
not be weak, my darling," he remonstrated; "don't tremble so. I have saved
him."

VII.
A Knock at the Door

"I have saved him." It was not another of the dreams in which he had often

come back; he was really here. And yet his wife trembled, and a vague but
heavy fear was upon her.
All the air round was so thick and dark, the people were so passionately
revengeful and fitful, the innocent were so constantly put to death on vague
suspicion and black malice, it was so impossible to forget that many as
blameless as her husband and as dear to others as he was to her, every day
shared the fate from which he had been clutched, that her heart could not be as
lightened of its load as she felt it ought to be. The shadows of the wintry
afternoon were beginning to fall, and even now the dreadful carts were rolling
through the streets. Her mind pursued them, looking for him among the
Condemned; and then she clung closer to his real presence and trembled more.
Her father, cheering her, showed a compassionate superiority to this woman's
weakness, which was wonderful to see. No garret, no shoemaking, no One
Hundred and Five, North Tower, now! He had accomplished the task he had
set himself, his promise was redeemed, he had saved Charles. Let them all
lean upon him.
Their housekeeping was of a very frugal kind: not only because that was the
safest way of life, involving the least offence to the people, but because they
were not rich, and Charles, throughout his imprisonment, had had to pay
heavily for his bad food, and for his guard, and towards the living of the
poorer prisoners. Partly on this account, and partly to avoid a domestic spy,
they kept no servant; the citizen and citizeness who acted as porters at the
courtyard gate, rendered them occasional service; and Jerry (almost wholly
transferred to them by Mr. Lorry) had become their daily retainer, and had his
bed there every night.
It was an ordinance of the Republic One and Indivisible of Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity, or Death, that on the door or doorpost of every house, the name of
every inmate must be legibly inscribed in letters of a certain size, at a certain
convenient height from the ground. Mr. Jerry Cruncher's name, therefore, duly
embellished the doorpost down below; and, as the afternoon shadows
deepened, the owner of that name himself appeared, from overlooking a
painter whom Doctor Manette had employed to add to the list the name of
Charles Evremonde, called Darnay.
In the universal fear and distrust that darkened the time, all the usual harmless
ways of life were changed. In the Doctor's little household, as in very many
others, the articles of daily consumption that were wanted were purchased
every evening, in small quantities and at various small shops. To avoid
attracting notice, and to give as little occasion as possible for talk and envy,
was the general desire.

For some months past, Miss Pross and Mr. Cruncher had discharged the office
of purveyors; the former carrying the money; the latter, the basket. Every
afternoon at about the time when the public lamps were lighted, they fared
forth on this duty, and made and brought home such purchases as were
needful. Although Miss Pross, through her long association with a French
family, might have known as much of their language as of her own, if she had
had a mind, she had no mind in that direction; consequently she knew no more
of that "nonsense" (as she was pleased to call it) than Mr. Cruncher did. So her
manner of marketing was to plump a nounsubstantive at the head of a
shopkeeper without any introduction in the nature of an article, and, if it
happened not to be the name of the thing she wanted, to look round for that
thing, lay hold of it, and hold on by it until the bargain was concluded. She
always made a bargain for it, by holding up, as a statement of its just price,
one finger less than the merchant held up, whatever his number might be.
"Now, Mr. Cruncher," said Miss Pross, whose eyes were red with felicity; "if
you are ready, I am."
Jerry hoarsely professed himself at Miss Pross's service. He had worn all his
rust off long ago, but nothing would file his spiky head down.
"There's all manner of things wanted," said Miss Pross, "and we shall have a
precious time of it. We want wine, among the rest. Nice toasts these Redheads
will be drinking, wherever we buy it."
"It will be much the same to your knowledge, miss, I should think," retorted
Jerry, "whether they drink your health or the Old Un's."
"Who's he?" said Miss Pross.
Mr. Cruncher, with some diffidence, explained himself as meaning "Old
Nick's."
"Ha!" said Miss Pross, "it doesn't need an interpreter to explain the meaning of
these creatures. They have but one, and it's Midnight Murder, and Mischief."
"Hush, dear! Pray, pray, be cautious!" cried Lucie.
"Yes, yes, yes, I'll be cautious," said Miss Pross; "but I may say among
ourselves, that I do hope there will be no oniony and tobaccoey smotherings in
the form of embracings all round, going on in the streets. Now, Ladybird,
never you stir from that fire till I come back! Take care of the dear husband
you have recovered, and don't move your pretty head from his shoulder as you
have it now, till you see me again! May I ask a question, Doctor Manette,
before I go?"

"I think you may take that liberty," the Doctor answered, smiling.
"For gracious sake, don't talk about Liberty; we have quite enough of that,"
said Miss Pross.
"Hush, dear! Again?" Lucie remonstrated.
"Well, my sweet," said Miss Pross, nodding her head emphatically, "the short
and the long of it is, that I am a subject of His Most Gracious Majesty King
George the Third;" Miss Pross curtseyed at the name; "and as such, my maxim
is, Confound their politics, Frustrate their knavish tricks, On him our hopes we
fix, God save the King!"
Mr. Cruncher, in an access of loyalty, growlingly repeated the words after
Miss Pross, like somebody at church.
"I am glad you have so much of the Englishman in you, though I wish you had
never taken that cold in your voice," said Miss Pross, approvingly. "But the
question, Doctor Manette. Is there"it was the good creature's way to affect to
make light of anything that was a great anxiety with them all, and to come at it
in this chance manner"is there any prospect yet, of our getting out of this
place?"
"I fear not yet. It would be dangerous for Charles yet."
"Heighhohum!" said Miss Pross, cheerfully repressing a sigh as she glanced at
her darling's golden hair in the light of the fire, "then we must have patience
and wait: that's all. We must hold up our heads and fight low, as my brother
Solomon used to say. Now, Mr. Cruncher!Don't you move, Ladybird!"
They went out, leaving Lucie, and her husband, her father, and the child, by a
bright fire. Mr. Lorry was expected back presently from the Banking House.
Miss Pross had lighted the lamp, but had put it aside in a corner, that they
might enjoy the firelight undisturbed. Little Lucie sat by her grandfather with
her hands clasped through his arm: and he, in a tone not rising much above a
whisper, began to tell her a story of a great and powerful Fairy who had
opened a prisonwall and let out a captive who had once done the Fairy a
service. All was subdued and quiet, and Lucie was more at ease than she had
been.
"What is that?" she cried, all at once.
"My dear!" said her father, stopping in his story, and laying his hand on hers,
"command yourself. What a disordered state you are in! The least
thingnothingstartles you! You, your father's daughter!"

"I thought, my father," said Lucie, excusing herself, with a pale face and in a
faltering voice, "that I heard strange feet upon the stairs."
"My love, the staircase is as still as Death."
As he said the word, a blow was struck upon the door.
"Oh father, father. What can this be! Hide Charles. Save him!"
"My child," said the Doctor, rising, and laying his hand upon her shoulder, "I
have saved him. What weakness is this, my dear! Let me go to the door."
He took the lamp in his hand, crossed the two intervening outer rooms, and
opened it. A rude clattering of feet over the floor, and four rough men in red
caps, armed with sabres and pistols, entered the room.
"The Citizen Evremonde, called Darnay," said the first.
"Who seeks him?" answered Darnay.
"I seek him. We seek him. I know you, Evremonde; I saw you before the
Tribunal today. You are again the prisoner of the Republic."
The four surrounded him, where he stood with his wife and child clinging to
him.
"Tell me how and why am I again a prisoner?"
"It is enough that you return straight to the Conciergerie, and will know
tomorrow. You are summoned for tomorrow."
Doctor Manette, whom this visitation had so turned into stone, that he stood
with the lamp in his hand, as if be woe a statue made to hold it, moved after
these words were spoken, put the lamp down, and confronting the speaker, and
taking him, not ungently, by the loose front of his red woollen shirt, said:
"You know him, you have said. Do you know me?"
"Yes, I know you, Citizen Doctor."
"We all know you, Citizen Doctor," said the other three.
He looked abstractedly from one to another, and said, in a lower voice, after a
pause:
"Will you answer his question to me then? How does this happen?"
"Citizen Doctor," said the first, reluctantly, "he has been denounced to the

Section of Saint Antoine. This citizen," pointing out the second who had
entered, "is from Saint Antoine."
The citizen here indicated nodded his head, and added:
"He is accused by Saint Antoine."
"Of what?" asked the Doctor.
"Citizen Doctor," said the first, with his former reluctance, "ask no more. If the
Republic demands sacrifices from you, without doubt you as a good patriot
will be happy to make them. The Republic goes before all. The People is
supreme. Evremonde, we are pressed."
"One word," the Doctor entreated. "Will you tell me who denounced him?"
"It is against rule," answered the first; "but you can ask Him of Saint Antoine
here."
The Doctor turned his eyes upon that man. Who moved uneasily on his feet,
rubbed his beard a little, and at length said:
"Well! Truly it is against rule. But he is denouncedand gravelyby the Citizen
and Citizeness Defarge. And by one other."
"What other?"
"Do you ask, Citizen Doctor?"
"Yes."
"Then," said he of Saint Antoine, with a strange look, "you will be answered
tomorrow. Now, I am dumb!"

VIII.
A Hand at Cards

Happily unconscious of the new calamity at home, Miss Pross threaded her
way along the narrow streets and crossed the river by the bridge of the
PontNeuf, reckoning in her mind the number of indispensable purchases she
had to make. Mr. Cruncher, with the basket, walked at her side. They both
looked to the right and to the left into most of the shops they passed, had a

wary eye for all gregarious assemblages of people, and turned out of their road
to avoid any very excited group of talkers. It was a raw evening, and the misty
river, blurred to the eye with blazing lights and to the ear with harsh noises,
showed where the barges were stationed in which the smiths worked, making
guns for the Army of the Republic. Woe to the man who played tricks with
that Army, or got undeserved promotion in it! Better for him that his beard had
never grown, for the National Razor shaved him close.
Having purchased a few small articles of grocery, and a measure of oil for the
lamp, Miss Pross bethought herself of the wine they wanted. After peeping
into several wineshops, she stopped at the sign of the Good Republican Brutus
of Antiquity, not far from the National Palace, once (and twice) the Tuileries,
where the aspect of things rather took her fancy. It had a quieter look than any
other place of the same description they had passed, and, though red with
patriotic caps, was not so red as the rest. Sounding Mr. Cruncher, and finding
him of her opinion, Miss Pross resorted to the Good Republican Brutus of
Antiquity, attended by her cavalier.
Slightly observant of the smoky lights; of the people, pipe in mouth, playing
with limp cards and yellow dominoes; of the one barebreasted, barearmed,
sootbegrimed workman reading a journal aloud, and of the others listening to
him; of the weapons worn, or laid aside to be resumed; of the two or three
customers fallen forward asleep, who in the popular highshouldered shaggy
black spencer looked, in that attitude, like slumbering bears or dogs; the two
outlandish customers approached the counter, and showed what they wanted.
As their wine was measuring out, a man parted from another man in a corner,
and rose to depart. In going, he had to face Miss Pross. No sooner did he face
her, than Miss Pross uttered a scream, and clapped her hands.
In a moment, the whole company were on their feet. That somebody was
assassinated by somebody vindicating a difference of opinion was the likeliest
occurrence. Everybody looked to see somebody fall, but only saw a man and a
woman standing staring at each other; the man with all the outward aspect of a
Frenchman and a thorough Republican; the woman, evidently English.
What was said in this disappointing anticlimax, by the disciples of the Good
Republican Brutus of Antiquity, except that it was something very voluble and
loud, would have been as so much Hebrew or Chaldean to Miss Pross and her
protector, though they had been all ears. But, they had no ears for anything in
their surprise. For, it must be recorded, that not only was Miss Pross lost in
amazement and agitation, but, Mr. Cruncherthough it seemed on his own
separate and individual accountwas in a state of the greatest wonder.

"What is the matter?" said the man who had caused Miss Pross to scream;
speaking in a vexed, abrupt voice (though in a low tone), and in English.
"Oh, Solomon, dear Solomon!" cried Miss Pross, clapping her hands again.
"After not setting eyes upon you or hearing of you for so long a time, do I find
you here!"
"Don't call me Solomon. Do you want to be the death of me?" asked the man,
in a furtive, frightened way.
"Brother, brother!" cried Miss Pross, bursting into tears. "Have I ever been so
hard with you that you ask me such a cruel question?"
"Then hold your meddlesome tongue," said Solomon, "and come out, if you
want to speak to me. Pay for your wine, and come out. Who's this man?"
Miss Pross, shaking her loving and dejected head at her by no means
affectionate brother, said through her tears, "Mr. Cruncher."
"Let him come out too," said Solomon. "Does he think me a ghost?"
Apparently, Mr. Cruncher did, to judge from his looks. He said not a word,
however, and Miss Pross, exploring the depths of her reticule through her tears
with great difficulty paid for her wine. As she did so, Solomon turned to the
followers of the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, and offered a few
words of explanation in the French language, which caused them all to relapse
into their former places and pursuits.
"Now," said Solomon, stopping at the dark street corner, "what do you want?"
"How dreadfully unkind in a brother nothing has ever turned my love away
from!" cried Miss Pross, "to give me such a greeting, and show me no
affection."
"There. Confound it! There," said Solomon, making a dab at Miss Pross's lips
with his own. "Now are you content?"
Miss Pross only shook her head and wept in silence.
"If you expect me to be surprised," said her brother Solomon, "I am not
surprised; I knew you were here; I know of most people who are here. If you
really don't want to endanger my existencewhich I half believe you dogo your
ways as soon as possible, and let me go mine. I am busy. I am an official."
"My English brother Solomon," mourned Miss Pross, casting up her
tearfraught eyes, "that had the makings in him of one of the best and greatest
of men in his native country, an official among foreigners, and such

foreigners! I would almost sooner have seen the dear boy lying in his"
"I said so!" cried her brother, interrupting. "I knew it. You want to be the death
of me. I shall be rendered Suspected, by my own sister. Just as I am getting
on!"
"The gracious and merciful Heavens forbid!" cried Miss Pross. "Far rather
would I never see you again, dear Solomon, though I have ever loved you
truly, and ever shall. Say but one affectionate word to me, and tell me there is
nothing angry or estranged between us, and I will detain you no longer."
Good Miss Pross! As if the estrangement between them had come of any
culpability of hers. As if Mr. Lorry had not known it for a fact, years ago, in
the quiet corner in Soho, that this precious brother had spent her money and
left her!
He was saying the affectionate word, however, with a far more grudging
condescension and patronage than he could have shown if their relative merits
and positions had been reversed (which is invariably the case, all the world
over), when Mr. Cruncher, touching him on the shoulder, hoarsely and
unexpectedly interposed with the following singular question:
"I say! Might I ask the favour? As to whether your name is John Solomon, or
Solomon John?"
The official turned towards him with sudden distrust. He had not previously
uttered a word.
"Come!" said Mr. Cruncher. "Speak out, you know." (Which, by the way, was
more than he could do himself.) "John Solomon, or Solomon John? She calls
you Solomon, and she must know, being your sister. And I know you're John,
you know. Which of the two goes first? And regarding that name of Pross,
likewise. That warn't your name over the water."
"What do you mean?"
"Well, I don't know all I mean, for I can't call to mind what your name was,
over the water."
"No?"
"No. But I'll swear it was a name of two syllables."
"Indeed?"
"Yes. T'other one's was one syllable. I know you. You was a spywitness at the
Bailey. What, in the name of the Father of Lies, own father to yourself, was

you called at that time?"
"Barsad," said another voice, striking in.
"That's the name for a thousand pound!" cried Jerry.
The speaker who struck in, was Sydney Carton. He had his hands behind him
under the skirts of his ridingcoat, and he stood at Mr. Cruncher's elbow as
negligently as he might have stood at the Old Bailey itself.
"Don't be alarmed, my dear Miss Pross. I arrived at Mr. Lorry's, to his
surprise, yesterday evening; we agreed that I would not present myself
elsewhere until all was well, or unless I could be useful; I present myself here,
to beg a little talk with your brother. I wish you had a better employed brother
than Mr. Barsad. I wish for your sake Mr. Barsad was not a Sheep of the
Prisons."
Sheep was a cant word of the time for a spy, under the gaolers. The spy, who
was pale, turned paler, and asked him how he dared
"I'll tell you," said Sydney. "I lighted on you, Mr. Barsad, coming out of the
prison of the Conciergerie while I was contemplating the walls, an hour or
more ago. You have a face to be remembered, and I remember faces well.
Made curious by seeing you in that connection, and having a reason, to which
you are no stranger, for associating you with the misfortunes of a friend now
very unfortunate, I walked in your direction. I walked into the wineshop here,
close after you, and sat near you. I had no difficulty in deducing from your
unreserved conversation, and the rumour openly going about among your
admirers, the nature of your calling. And gradually, what I had done at
random, seemed to shape itself into a purpose, Mr. Barsad."
"What purpose?" the spy asked.
"It would be troublesome, and might be dangerous, to explain in the street.
Could you favour me, in confidence, with some minutes of your companyat
the office of Tellson's Bank, for instance?"
"Under a threat?"
"Oh! Did I say that?"
"Then, why should I go there?"
"Really, Mr. Barsad, I can't say, if you can't."
"Do you mean that you won't say, sir?" the spy irresolutely asked.

"You apprehend me very clearly, Mr. Barsad. I won't."
Carton's negligent recklessness of manner came powerfully in aid of his
quickness and skill, in such a business as he had in his secret mind, and with
such a man as he had to do with. His practised eye saw it, and made the most
of it.
"Now, I told you so," said the spy, casting a reproachful look at his sister; "if
any trouble comes of this, it's your doing."
"Come, come, Mr. Barsad!" exclaimed Sydney. "Don't be ungrateful. But for
my great respect for your sister, I might not have led up so pleasantly to a little
proposal that I wish to make for our mutual satisfaction. Do you go with me to
the Bank?"
"I'll hear what you have got to say. Yes, I'll go with you."
"I propose that we first conduct your sister safely to the corner of her own
street. Let me take your arm, Miss Pross. This is not a good city, at this time,
for you to be out in, unprotected; and as your escort knows Mr. Barsad, I will
invite him to Mr. Lorry's with us. Are we ready? Come then!"
Miss Pross recalled soon afterwards, and to the end of her life remembered,
that as she pressed her hands on Sydney's arm and looked up in his face,
imploring him to do no hurt to Solomon, there was a braced purpose in the
arm and a kind of inspiration in the eyes, which not only contradicted his light
manner, but changed and raised the man. She was too much occupied then
with fears for the brother who so little deserved her affection, and with
Sydney's friendly reassurances, adequately to heed what she observed.
They left her at the corner of the street, and Carton led the way to Mr. Lorry's,
which was within a few minutes' walk. John Barsad, or Solomon Pross,
walked at his side.
Mr. Lorry had just finished his dinner, and was sitting before a cheery little log
or two of fireperhaps looking into their blaze for the picture of that younger
elderly gentleman from Tellson's, who had looked into the red coals at the
Royal George at Dover, now a good many years ago. He turned his head as
they entered, and showed the surprise with which he saw a stranger.
"Miss Pross's brother, sir," said Sydney. "Mr. Barsad."
"Barsad?" repeated the old gentleman, "Barsad? I have an association with the
nameand with the face."
"I told you you had a remarkable face, Mr. Barsad," observed Carton, coolly.

"Pray sit down."
As he took a chair himself, he supplied the link that Mr. Lorry wanted, by
saying to him with a frown, "Witness at that trial." Mr. Lorry immediately
remembered, and regarded his new visitor with an undisguised look of
abhorrence.
"Mr. Barsad has been recognised by Miss Pross as the affectionate brother you
have heard of," said Sydney, "and has acknowledged the relationship. I pass to
worse news. Darnay has been arrested again."
Struck with consternation, the old gentleman exclaimed, "What do you tell
me! I left him safe and free within these two hours, and am about to return to
him!"
"Arrested for all that. When was it done, Mr. Barsad?"
"Just now, if at all."
"Mr. Barsad is the best authority possible, sir," said Sydney, "and I have it
from Mr. Barsad's communication to a friend and brother Sheep over a bottle
of wine, that the arrest has taken place. He left the messengers at the gate, and
saw them admitted by the porter. There is no earthly doubt that he is retaken."
Mr. Lorry's business eye read in the speaker's face that it was loss of time to
dwell upon the point. Confused, but sensible that something might depend on
his presence of mind, he commanded himself, and was silently attentive.
"Now, I trust," said Sydney to him, "that the name and influence of Doctor
Manette may stand him in as good stead tomorrowyou said he would be before
the Tribunal again tomorrow, Mr. Barsad?"
"Yes; I believe so."
"In as good stead tomorrow as today. But it may not be so. I own to you, I am
shaken, Mr. Lorry, by Doctor Manette's not having had the power to prevent
this arrest."
"He may not have known of it beforehand," said Mr. Lorry.
"But that very circumstance would be alarming, when we remember how
identified he is with his soninlaw."
"That's true," Mr. Lorry acknowledged, with his troubled hand at his chin, and
his troubled eyes on Carton.
"In short," said Sydney, "this is a desperate time, when desperate games are

played for desperate stakes. Let the Doctor play the winning game; I will play
the losing one. No man's life here is worth purchase. Any one carried home by
the people today, may be condemned tomorrow. Now, the stake I have
resolved to play for, in case of the worst, is a friend in the Conciergerie. And
the friend I purpose to myself to win, is Mr. Barsad."
"You need have good cards, sir," said the spy.
"I'll run them over. I'll see what I hold,Mr. Lorry, you know what a brute I am;
I wish you'd give me a little brandy."
It was put before him, and he drank off a glassfuldrank off another
glassfulpushed the bottle thoughtfully away.
"Mr. Barsad," he went on, in the tone of one who really was looking over a
hand at cards: "Sheep of the prisons, emissary of Republican committees, now
turnkey, now prisoner, always spy and secret informer, so much the more
valuable here for being English that an Englishman is less open to suspicion of
subornation in those characters than a Frenchman, represents himself to his
employers under a false name. That's a very good card. Mr. Barsad, now in the
employ of the republican French government, was formerly in the employ of
the aristocratic English government, the enemy of France and freedom. That's
an excellent card. Inference clear as day in this region of suspicion, that Mr.
Barsad, still in the pay of the aristocratic English government, is the spy of
Pitt, the treacherous foe of the Republic crouching in its bosom, the English
traitor and agent of all mischief so much spoken of and so difficult to find.
That's a card not to be beaten. Have you followed my hand, Mr. Barsad?"
"Not to understand your play," returned the spy, somewhat uneasily.
"I play my Ace, Denunciation of Mr. Barsad to the nearest Section Committee.
Look over your hand, Mr. Barsad, and see what you have. Don't hurry."
He drew the bottle near, poured out another glassful of brandy, and drank it
off. He saw that the spy was fearful of his drinking himself into a fit state for
the immediate denunciation of him. Seeing it, he poured out and drank another
glassful.
"Look over your hand carefully, Mr. Barsad. Take time."
It was a poorer hand than he suspected. Mr. Barsad saw losing cards in it that
Sydney Carton knew nothing of. Thrown out of his honourable employment in
England, through too much unsuccessful hard swearing therenot because he
was not wanted there; our English reasons for vaunting our superiority to
secrecy and spies are of very modern datehe knew that he had crossed the

Channel, and accepted service in France: first, as a tempter and an
eavesdropper among his own countrymen there: gradually, as a tempter and an
eavesdropper among the natives. He knew that under the overthrown
government he had been a spy upon Saint Antoine and Defarge's wineshop;
had received from the watchful police such heads of information concerning
Doctor Manette's imprisonment, release, and history, as should serve him for
an introduction to familiar conversation with the Defarges; and tried them on
Madame Defarge, and had broken down with them signally. He always
remembered with fear and trembling, that that terrible woman had knitted
when he talked with her, and had looked ominously at him as her fingers
moved. He had since seen her, in the Section of Saint Antoine, over and over
again produce her knitted registers, and denounce people whose lives the
guillotine then surely swallowed up. He knew, as every one employed as he
was did, that he was never safe; that flight was impossible; that he was tied
fast under the shadow of the axe; and that in spite of his utmost tergiversation
and treachery in furtherance of the reigning terror, a word might bring it down
upon him. Once denounced, and on such grave grounds as had just now been
suggested to his mind, he foresaw that the dreadful woman of whose
unrelenting character he had seen many proofs, would produce against him
that fatal register, and would quash his last chance of life. Besides that all
secret men are men soon terrified, here were surely cards enough of one black
suit, to justify the holder in growing rather livid as he turned them over.
"You scarcely seem to like your hand," said Sydney, with the greatest
composure. "Do you play?"
"I think, sir," said the spy, in the meanest manner, as he turned to Mr. Lorry, "I
may appeal to a gentleman of your years and benevolence, to put it to this
other gentleman, so much your junior, whether he can under any
circumstances reconcile it to his station to play that Ace of which he has
spoken. I admit that I am a spy, and that it is considered a discreditable
stationthough it must be filled by somebody; but this gentleman is no spy, and
why should he so demean himself as to make himself one?"
"I play my Ace, Mr. Barsad," said Carton, taking the answer on himself, and
looking at his watch, "without any scruple, in a very few minutes."
"I should have hoped, gentlemen both," said the spy, always striving to hook
Mr. Lorry into the discussion, "that your respect for my sister"
"I could not better testify my respect for your sister than by finally relieving
her of her brother," said Sydney Carton.
"You think not, sir?"

"I have thoroughly made up my mind about it."
The smooth manner of the spy, curiously in dissonance with his ostentatiously
rough dress, and probably with his usual demeanour, received such a check
from the inscrutability of Carton,who was a mystery to wiser and honester
men than he,that it faltered here and failed him. While he was at a loss, Carton
said, resuming his former air of contemplating cards:
"And indeed, now I think again, I have a strong impression that I have another
good card here, not yet enumerated. That friend and fellowSheep, who spoke
of himself as pasturing in the country prisons; who was he?"
"French. You don't know him," said the spy, quickly.
"French, eh?" repeated Carton, musing, and not appearing to notice him at all,
though he echoed his word. "Well; he may be."
"Is, I assure you," said the spy; "though it's not important."
"Though it's not important," repeated Carton, in the same mechanical
way"though it's not importantNo, it's not important. No. Yet I know the face."
"I think not. I am sure not. It can't be," said the spy.
"Itcan'tbe," muttered Sydney Carton, retrospectively, and idling his glass
(which fortunately was a small one) again. "Can'tbe. Spoke good French. Yet
like a foreigner, I thought?"
"Provincial," said the spy.
"No. Foreign!" cried Carton, striking his open hand on the table, as a light
broke clearly on his mind. "Cly! Disguised, but the same man. We had that
man before us at the Old Bailey."
"Now, there you are hasty, sir," said Barsad, with a smile that gave his aquiline
nose an extra inclination to one side; "there you really give me an advantage
over you. Cly (who I will unreservedly admit, at this distance of time, was a
partner of mine) has been dead several years. I attended him in his last illness.
He was buried in London, at the church of Saint PancrasintheFields. His
unpopularity with the blackguard multitude at the moment prevented my
following his remains, but I helped to lay him in his coffin."
Here, Mr. Lorry became aware, from where he sat, of a most remarkable
goblin shadow on the wall. Tracing it to its source, he discovered it to be
caused by a sudden extraordinary rising and stiffening of all the risen and stiff
hair on Mr. Cruncher's head.

"Let us be reasonable," said the spy, "and let us be fair. To show you how
mistaken you are, and what an unfounded assumption yours is, I will lay
before you a certificate of Cly's burial, which I happened to have carried in my
pocketbook," with a hurried hand he produced and opened it, "ever since.
There it is. Oh, look at it, look at it! You may take it in your hand; it's no
forgery."
Here, Mr. Lorry perceived the reflection on the wall to elongate, and Mr.
Cruncher rose and stepped forward. His hair could not have been more
violently on end, if it had been that moment dressed by the Cow with the
crumpled horn in the house that Jack built.
Unseen by the spy, Mr. Cruncher stood at his side, and touched him on the
shoulder like a ghostly bailiff.
"That there Roger Cly, master," said Mr. Cruncher, with a taciturn and
ironbound visage. "So you put him in his coffin?"
"I did."
"Who took him out of it?"
Barsad leaned back in his chair, and stammered, "What do you mean?"
"I mean," said Mr. Cruncher, "that he warn't never in it. No! Not he! I'll have
my head took off, if he was ever in it."
The spy looked round at the two gentlemen; they both looked in unspeakable
astonishment at Jerry.
"I tell you," said Jerry, "that you buried pavingstones and earth in that there
coffin. Don't go and tell me that you buried Cly. It was a take in. Me and two
more knows it."
"How do you know it?"
"What's that to you? Ecod!" growled Mr. Cruncher, "it's you I have got a old
grudge again, is it, with your shameful impositions upon tradesmen! I'd catch
hold of your throat and choke you for half a guinea."
Sydney Carton, who, with Mr. Lorry, had been lost in amazement at this turn
of the business, here requested Mr. Cruncher to moderate and explain himself.
"At another time, sir," he returned, evasively, "the present time is
illconwenient for explainin'. What I stand to, is, that he knows well wot that
there Cly was never in that there coffin. Let him say he was, in so much as a
word of one syllable, and I'll either catch hold of his throat and choke him for

half a guinea;" Mr. Cruncher dwelt upon this as quite a liberal offer; "or I'll out
and announce him."
"Humph! I see one thing," said Carton. "I hold another card, Mr. Barsad.
Impossible, here in raging Paris, with Suspicion filling the air, for you to
outlive denunciation, when you are in communication with another aristocratic
spy of the same antecedents as yourself, who, moreover, has the mystery about
him of having feigned death and come to life again! A plot in the prisons, of
the foreigner against the Republic. A strong carda certain Guillotine card! Do
you play?"
"No!" returned the spy. "I throw up. I confess that we were so unpopular with
the outrageous mob, that I only got away from England at the risk of being
ducked to death, and that Cly was so ferreted up and down, that he never
would have got away at all but for that sham. Though how this man knows it
was a sham, is a wonder of wonders to me."
"Never you trouble your head about this man," retorted the contentious Mr.
Cruncher; "you'll have trouble enough with giving your attention to that
gentleman. And look here! Once more!"Mr. Cruncher could not be restrained
from making rather an ostentatious parade of his liberality"I'd catch hold of
your throat and choke you for half a guinea."
The Sheep of the prisons turned from him to Sydney Carton, and said, with
more decision, "It has come to a point. I go on duty soon, and can't overstay
my time. You told me you had a proposal; what is it? Now, it is of no use
asking too much of me. Ask me to do anything in my office, putting my head
in great extra danger, and I had better trust my life to the chances of a refusal
than the chances of consent. In short, I should make that choice. You talk of
desperation. We are all desperate here. Remember! I may denounce you if I
think proper, and I can swear my way through stone walls, and so can others.
Now, what do you want with me?"
"Not very much. You are a turnkey at the Conciergerie?"
"I tell you once for all, there is no such thing as an escape possible," said the
spy, firmly.
"Why need you tell me what I have not asked? You are a turnkey at the
Conciergerie?"
"I am sometimes."
"You can be when you choose?"
"I can pass in and out when I choose."

Sydney Carton filled another glass with brandy, poured it slowly out upon the
hearth, and watched it as it dropped. It being all spent, he said, rising:
"So far, we have spoken before these two, because it was as well that the
merits of the cards should not rest solely between you and me. Come into the
dark room here, and let us have one final word alone."

IX.
The Game Made

While Sydney Carton and the Sheep of the prisons were in the adjoining dark
room, speaking so low that not a sound was heard, Mr. Lorry looked at Jerry in
considerable doubt and mistrust. That honest tradesman's manner of receiving
the look, did not inspire confidence; he changed the leg on which he rested, as
often as if he had fifty of those limbs, and were trying them all; he examined
his fingernails with a very questionable closeness of attention; and whenever
Mr. Lorry's eye caught his, he was taken with that peculiar kind of short cough
requiring the hollow of a hand before it, which is seldom, if ever, known to be
an infirmity attendant on perfect openness of character.
"Jerry," said Mr. Lorry. "Come here."
Mr. Cruncher came forward sideways, with one of his shoulders in advance of
him.
"What have you been, besides a messenger?"
After some cogitation, accompanied with an intent look at his patron, Mr.
Cruncher conceived the luminous idea of replying, "Agicultooral character."
"My mind misgives me much," said Mr. Lorry, angrily shaking a forefinger at
him, "that you have used the respectable and great house of Tellson's as a
blind, and that you have had an unlawful occupation of an infamous
description. If you have, don't expect me to befriend you when you get back to
England. If you have, don't expect me to keep your secret. Tellson's shall not
be imposed upon."
"I hope, sir," pleaded the abashed Mr. Cruncher, "that a gentleman like
yourself wot I've had the honour of odd jobbing till I'm grey at it, would think
twice about harming of me, even if it wos soI don't say it is, but even if it wos.
And which it is to be took into account that if it wos, it wouldn't, even then, be

all o' one side. There'd be two sides to it. There might be medical doctors at
the present hour, a picking up their guineas where a honest tradesman don't
pick up his fardensfardens! no, nor yet his half fardenshalf fardens! no, nor yet
his quartera banking away like smoke at Tellson's, and a cocking their medical
eyes at that tradesman on the sly, a going in and going out to their own
carriagesah! equally like smoke, if not more so. Well, that 'ud be imposing,
too, on Tellson's. For you cannot sarse the goose and not the gander. And
here's Mrs. Cruncher, or leastways wos in the Old England times, and would
be tomorrow, if cause given, a floppin' again the business to that degree as is
ruinatingstark ruinating! Whereas them medical doctors' wives don't flopcatch
'em at it! Or, if they flop, their floppings goes in favour of more patients, and
how can you rightly have one without t'other? Then, wot with undertakers, and
wot with parish clerks, and wot with sextons, and wot with private watchmen
(all awaricious and all in it), a man wouldn't get much by it, even if it wos so.
And wot little a man did get, would never prosper with him, Mr. Lorry. He'd
never have no good of it; he'd want all along to be out of the line, if he, could
see his way out, being once ineven if it wos so."
"Ugh!" cried Mr. Lorry, rather relenting, nevertheless, "I am shocked at the
sight of you."
"Now, what I would humbly offer to you, sir," pursued Mr. Cruncher, "even if
it wos so, which I don't say it is"
"Don't prevaricate," said Mr. Lorry.
"No, I will not, sir," returned Mr. Crunches as if nothing were further from his
thoughts or practice"which I don't say it iswot I would humbly offer to you,
sir, would be this. Upon that there stool, at that there Bar, sets that there boy of
mine, brought up and growed up to be a man, wot will errand you, message
you, generallightjob you, till your heels is where your head is, if such should
be your wishes. If it wos so, which I still don't say it is (for I will not
prewaricate to you, sir), let that there boy keep his father's place, and take care
of his mother; don't blow upon that boy's fatherdo not do it, sirand let that
father go into the line of the reg'lar diggin', and make amends for what he
would have undugif it wos soby diggin' of 'em in with a will, and with
conwictions respectin' the futur' keepin' of 'em safe. That, Mr. Lorry," said Mr.
Cruncher, wiping his forehead with his arm, as an announcement that he had
arrived at the peroration of his discourse, "is wot I would respectfully offer to
you, sir. A man don't see all this here a goin' on dreadful round him, in the way
of Subjects without heads, dear me, plentiful enough fur to bring the price
down to porterage and hardly that, without havin' his serious thoughts of
things. And these here would be mine, if it wos so, entreatin' of you fur to bear
in mind that wot I said just now, I up and said in the good cause when I might

have kep' it back."
"That at least is true," said Mr. Lorry. "Say no more now. It may be that I shall
yet stand your friend, if you deserve it, and repent in actionnot in words. I
want no more words."
Mr. Cruncher knuckled his forehead, as Sydney Carton and the spy returned
from the dark room. "Adieu, Mr. Barsad," said the former; "our arrangement
thus made, you have nothing to fear from me."
He sat down in a chair on the hearth, over against Mr. Lorry. When they were
alone, Mr. Lorry asked him what he had done?
"Not much. If it should go ill with the prisoner, I have ensured access to him,
once."
Mr. Lorry's countenance fell.
"It is all I could do," said Carton. "To propose too much, would be to put this
man's head under the axe, and, as he himself said, nothing worse could happen
to him if he were denounced. It was obviously the weakness of the position.
There is no help for it."
"But access to him," said Mr. Lorry, "if it should go ill before the Tribunal,
will not save him."
"I never said it would."
Mr. Lorry's eyes gradually sought the fire; his sympathy with his darling, and
the heavy disappointment of his second arrest, gradually weakened them; he
was an old man now, overborne with anxiety of late, and his tears fell.
"You are a good man and a true friend," said Carton, in an altered voice.
"Forgive me if I notice that you are affected. I could not see my father weep,
and sit by, careless. And I could not respect your sorrow more, if you were my
father. You are free from that misfortune, however."
Though he said the last words, with a slip into his usual manner, there was a
true feeling and respect both in his tone and in his touch, that Mr. Lorry, who
had never seen the better side of him, was wholly unprepared for. He gave him
his hand, and Carton gently pressed it.
"To return to poor Darnay," said Carton. "Don't tell Her of this interview, or
this arrangement. It would not enable Her to go to see him. She might think it
was contrived, in case of the worse, to convey to him the means of anticipating
the sentence."

Mr. Lorry had not thought of that, and he looked quickly at Carton to see if it
were in his mind. It seemed to be; he returned the look, and evidently
understood it.
"She might think a thousand things," Carton said, "and any of them would
only add to her trouble. Don't speak of me to her. As I said to you when I first
came, I had better not see her. I can put my hand out, to do any little helpful
work for her that my hand can find to do, without that. You are going to her, I
hope? She must be very desolate tonight."
"I am going now, directly."
"I am glad of that. She has such a strong attachment to you and reliance on
you. How does she look?"
"Anxious and unhappy, but very beautiful."
"Ah!"
It was a long, grieving sound, like a sighalmost like a sob. It attracted Mr.
Lorry's eyes to Carton's face, which was turned to the fire. A light, or a shade
(the old gentleman could not have said which), passed from it as swiftly as a
change will sweep over a hillside on a wild bright day, and he lifted his foot to
put back one of the little flaming logs, which was tumbling forward. He wore
the white ridingcoat and topboots, then in vogue, and the light of the fire
touching their light surfaces made him look very pale, with his long brown
hair, all untrimmed, hanging loose about him. His indifference to fire was
sufficiently remarkable to elicit a word of remonstrance from Mr. Lorry; his
boot was still upon the hot embers of the flaming log, when it had broken
under the weight of his foot.
"I forgot it," he said.
Mr. Lorry's eyes were again attracted to his face. Taking note of the wasted air
which clouded the naturally handsome features, and having the expression of
prisoners' faces fresh in his mind, he was strongly reminded of that expression.
"And your duties here have drawn to an end, sir?" said Carton, turning to him.
"Yes. As I was telling you last night when Lucie came in so unexpectedly, I
have at length done all that I can do here. I hoped to have left them in perfect
safety, and then to have quitted Paris. I have my Leave to Pass. I was ready to
go."
They were both silent.

"Yours is a long life to look back upon, sir?" said Carton, wistfully.
"I am in my seventyeighth year."
"You have been useful all your life; steadily and constantly occupied; trusted,
respected, and looked up to?"
"I have been a man of business, ever since I have been a man. Indeed, I may
say that I was a man of business when a boy."
"See what a place you fill at seventyeight. How many people will miss you
when you leave it empty!"
"A solitary old bachelor," answered Mr. Lorry, shaking his head. "There is
nobody to weep for me."
"How can you say that? Wouldn't She weep for you? Wouldn't her child?"
"Yes, yes, thank God. I didn't quite mean what I said."
"It is a thing to thank God for; is it not?"
"Surely, surely."
"If you could say, with truth, to your own solitary heart, tonight, 'I have
secured to myself the love and attachment, the gratitude or respect, of no
human creature; I have won myself a tender place in no regard; I have done
nothing good or serviceable to be remembered by!' your seventyeight years
would be seventyeight heavy curses; would they not?"
"You say truly, Mr. Carton; I think they would be."
Sydney turned his eyes again upon the fire, and, after a silence of a few
moments, said:
"I should like to ask you:Does your childhood seem far off? Do the days when
you sat at your mother's knee, seem days of very long ago?"
Responding to his softened manner, Mr. Lorry answered:
"Twenty years back, yes; at this time of my life, no. For, as I draw closer and
closer to the end, I travel in the circle, nearer and nearer to the beginning. It
seems to be one of the kind smoothings and preparings of the way. My heart is
touched now, by many remembrances that had long fallen asleep, of my pretty
young mother (and I so old!), and by many associations of the days when what
we call the World was not so real with me, and my faults were not confirmed
in me."

"I understand the feeling!" exclaimed Carton, with a bright flush. "And you
are the better for it?"
"I hope so."
Carton terminated the conversation here, by rising to help him on with his
outer coat; "But you," said Mr. Lorry, reverting to the theme, "you are young."
"Yes," said Carton. "I am not old, but my young way was never the way to
age. Enough of me."
"And of me, I am sure," said Mr. Lorry. "Are you going out?"
"I'll walk with you to her gate. You know my vagabond and restless habits. If I
should prowl about the streets a long time, don't be uneasy; I shall reappear in
the morning. You go to the Court tomorrow?"
"Yes, unhappily."
"I shall be there, but only as one of the crowd. My Spy will find a place for
me. Take my arm, sir."
Mr. Lorry did so, and they went downstairs and out in the streets. A few
minutes brought them to Mr. Lorry's destination. Carton left him there; but
lingered at a little distance, and turned back to the gate again when it was shut,
and touched it. He had heard of her going to the prison every day. "She came
out here," he said, looking about him, "turned this way, must have trod on
these stones often. Let me follow in her steps."
It was ten o'clock at night when he stood before the prison of La Force, where
she had stood hundreds of times. A little woodsawyer, having closed his shop,
was smoking his pipe at his shopdoor.
"Good night, citizen," said Sydney Carton, pausing in going by; for, the man
eyed him inquisitively.
"Good night, citizen."
"How goes the Republic?"
"You mean the Guillotine. Not ill. Sixtythree today. We shall mount to a
hundred soon. Samson and his men complain sometimes, of being exhausted.
Ha, ha, ha! He is so droll, that Samson. Such a Barber!"
"Do you often go to see him"
"Shave? Always. Every day. What a barber! You have seen him at work?"

"Never."
"Go and see him when he has a good batch. Figure this to yourself, citizen; he
shaved the sixtythree today, in less than two pipes! Less than two pipes. Word
of honour!"
As the grinning little man held out the pipe he was smoking, to explain how he
timed the executioner, Carton was so sensible of a rising desire to strike the
life out of him, that he turned away.
"But you are not English," said the woodsawyer, "though you wear English
dress?"
"Yes," said Carton, pausing again, and answering over his shoulder.
"You speak like a Frenchman."
"I am an old student here."
"Aha, a perfect Frenchman! Good night, Englishman."
"Good night, citizen."
"But go and see that droll dog," the little man persisted, calling after him.
"And take a pipe with you!"
Sydney had not gone far out of sight, when he stopped in the middle of the
street under a glimmering lamp, and wrote with his pencil on a scrap of paper.
Then, traversing with the decided step of one who remembered the way well,
several dark and dirty streetsmuch dirtier than usual, for the best public
thoroughfares remained uncleansed in those times of terrorhe stopped at a
chemist's shop, which the owner was closing with his own hands. A small,
dim, crooked shop, kept in a tortuous, uphill thoroughfare, by a small, dim,
crooked man.
Giving this citizen, too, good night, as he confronted him at his counter, he
laid the scrap of paper before him. "Whew!" the chemist whistled softly, as he
read it. "Hi! hi! hi!"
Sydney Carton took no heed, and the chemist said:
"For you, citizen?"
"For me."
"You will be careful to keep them separate, citizen? You know the
consequences of mixing them?"

"Perfectly."
Certain small packets were made and given to him. He put them, one by one,
in the breast of his inner coat, counted out the money for them, and
deliberately left the shop. "There is nothing more to do," said he, glancing
upward at the moon, "until tomorrow. I can't sleep."
It was not a reckless manner, the manner in which he said these words aloud
under the fastsailing clouds, nor was it more expressive of negligence than
defiance. It was the settled manner of a tired man, who had wandered and
struggled and got lost, but who at length struck into his road and saw its end.
Long ago, when he had been famous among his earliest competitors as a youth
of great promise, he had followed his father to the grave. His mother had died,
years before. These solemn words, which had been read at his father's grave,
arose in his mind as he went down the dark streets, among the heavy shadows,
with the moon and the clouds sailing on high above him. "I am the
resurrection and the life, saith the Lord: he that believeth in me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall
never die."
In a city dominated by the axe, alone at night, with natural sorrow rising in
him for the sixtythree who had been that day put to death, and for tomorrow's
victims then awaiting their doom in the prisons, and still of tomorrow's and
tomorrow's, the chain of association that brought the words home, like a rusty
old ship's anchor from the deep, might have been easily found. He did not seek
it, but repeated them and went on.
With a solemn interest in the lighted windows where the people were going to
rest, forgetful through a few calm hours of the horrors surrounding them; in
the towers of the churches, where no prayers were said, for the popular
revulsion had even travelled that length of selfdestruction from years of
priestly impostors, plunderers, and profligates; in the distant burialplaces,
reserved, as they wrote upon the gates, for Eternal Sleep; in the abounding
gaols; and in the streets along which the sixties rolled to a death which had
become so common and material, that no sorrowful story of a haunting Spirit
ever arose among the people out of all the working of the Guillotine; with a
solemn interest in the whole life and death of the city settling down to its short
nightly pause in fury; Sydney Carton crossed the Seine again for the lighter
streets.
Few coaches were abroad, for riders in coaches were liable to be suspected,
and gentility hid its head in red nightcaps, and put on heavy shoes, and
trudged. But, the theatres were all well filled, and the people poured cheerfully

out as he passed, and went chatting home. At one of the theatre doors, there
was a little girl with a mother, looking for a way across the street through the
mud. He carried the child over, and before the timid arm was loosed from his
neck asked her for a kiss.
"I am the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord: he that believeth in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in
me, shall never die."
Now, that the streets were quiet, and the night wore on, the words were in the
echoes of his feet, and were in the air. Perfectly calm and steady, he sometimes
repeated them to himself as he walked; but, he heard them always.
The night wore out, and, as he stood upon the bridge listening to the water as it
splashed the riverwalls of the Island of Paris, where the picturesque confusion
of houses and cathedral shone bright in the light of the moon, the day came
coldly, looking like a dead face out of the sky. Then, the night, with the moon
and the stars, turned pale and died, and for a little while it seemed as if
Creation were delivered over to Death's dominion.
But, the glorious sun, rising, seemed to strike those words, that burden of the
night, straight and warm to his heart in its long bright rays. And looking along
them, with reverently shaded eyes, a bridge of light appeared to span the air
between him and the sun, while the river sparkled under it.
The strong tide, so swift, so deep, and certain, was like a congenial friend, in
the morning stillness. He walked by the stream, far from the houses, and in the
light and warmth of the sun fell asleep on the bank. When he awoke and was
afoot again, he lingered there yet a little longer, watching an eddy that turned
and turned purposeless, until the stream absorbed it, and carried it on to the
sea."Like me."
A tradingboat, with a sail of the softened colour of a dead leaf, then glided into
his view, floated by him, and died away. As its silent track in the water
disappeared, the prayer that had broken up out of his heart for a merciful
consideration of all his poor blindnesses and errors, ended in the words, "I am
the resurrection and the life."
Mr. Lorry was already out when he got back, and it was easy to surmise where
the good old man was gone. Sydney Carton drank nothing but a little coffee,
ate some bread, and, having washed and changed to refresh himself, went out
to the place of trial.
The court was all astir and abuzz, when the black sheepwhom many fell away
from in dreadpressed him into an obscure corner among the crowd. Mr. Lorry

was there, and Doctor Manette was there. She was there, sitting beside her
father.
When her husband was brought in, she turned a look upon him, so sustaining,
so encouraging, so full of admiring love and pitying tenderness, yet so
courageous for his sake, that it called the healthy blood into his face,
brightened his glance, and animated his heart. If there had been any eyes to
notice the influence of her look, on Sydney Carton, it would have been seen to
be the same influence exactly.
Before that unjust Tribunal, there was little or no order of procedure, ensuring
to any accused person any reasonable hearing. There could have been no such
Revolution, if all laws, forms, and ceremonies, had not first been so
monstrously abused, that the suicidal vengeance of the Revolution was to
scatter them all to the winds.
Every eye was turned to the jury. The same determined patriots and good
republicans as yesterday and the day before, and tomorrow and the day after.
Eager and prominent among them, one man with a craving face, and his
fingers perpetually hovering about his lips, whose appearance gave great
satisfaction to the spectators. A lifethirsting, canniballooking, bloodyminded
juryman, the Jacques Three of St. Antoine. The whole jury, as a jury of dogs
empannelled to try the deer.
Every eye then turned to the five judges and the public prosecutor. No
favourable leaning in that quarter today. A fell, uncompromising, murderous
businessmeaning there. Every eye then sought some other eye in the crowd,
and gleamed at it approvingly; and heads nodded at one another, before
bending forward with a strained attention.
Charles Evremonde, called Darnay. Released yesterday. Reaccused and
retaken yesterday. Indictment delivered to him last night. Suspected and
Denounced enemy of the Republic, Aristocrat, one of a family of tyrants, one
of a race proscribed, for that they had used their abolished privileges to the
infamous oppression of the people. Charles Evremonde, called Darnay, in
right of such proscription, absolutely Dead in Law.
To this effect, in as few or fewer words, the Public Prosecutor.
The President asked, was the Accused openly denounced or secretly?
"Openly, President."
"By whom?"
"Three voices. Ernest Defarge, winevendor of St. Antoine."

"Good."
"Therese Defarge, his wife."
"Good."
"Alexandre Manette, physician."
A great uproar took place in the court, and in the midst of it, Doctor Manette
was seen, pale and trembling, standing where he had been seated.
"President, I indignantly protest to you that this is a forgery and a fraud. You
know the accused to be the husband of my daughter. My daughter, and those
dear to her, are far dearer to me than my life. Who and where is the false
conspirator who says that I denounce the husband of my child!"
"Citizen Manette, be tranquil. To fail in submission to the authority of the
Tribunal would be to put yourself out of Law. As to what is dearer to you than
life, nothing can be so dear to a good citizen as the Republic."
Loud acclamations hailed this rebuke. The President rang his bell, and with
warmth resumed.
"If the Republic should demand of you the sacrifice of your child herself, you
would have no duty but to sacrifice her. Listen to what is to follow. In the
meanwhile, be silent!"
Frantic acclamations were again raised. Doctor Manette sat down, with his
eyes looking around, and his lips trembling; his daughter drew closer to him.
The craving man on the jury rubbed his hands together, and restored the usual
hand to his mouth.
Defarge was produced, when the court was quiet enough to admit of his being
heard, and rapidly expounded the story of the imprisonment, and of his having
been a mere boy in the Doctor's service, and of the release, and of the state of
the prisoner when released and delivered to him. This short examination
followed, for the court was quick with its work.
"You did good service at the taking of the Bastille, citizen?"
"I believe so."
Here, an excited woman screeched from the crowd: "You were one of the best
patriots there. Why not say so? You were a cannonier that day there, and you
were among the first to enter the accursed fortress when it fell. Patriots, I
speak the truth!"

It was The Vengeance who, amidst the warm commendations of the audience,
thus assisted the proceedings. The President rang his bell; but, The Vengeance,
warming with encouragement, shrieked, "I defy that bell!" wherein she was
likewise much commended.
"Inform the Tribunal of what you did that day within the Bastille, citizen."
"I knew," said Defarge, looking down at his wife, who stood at the bottom of
the steps on which he was raised, looking steadily up at him; "I knew that this
prisoner, of whom I speak, had been confined in a cell known as One Hundred
and Five, North Tower. I knew it from himself. He knew himself by no other
name than One Hundred and Five, North Tower, when he made shoes under
my care. As I serve my gun that day, I resolve, when the place shall fall, to
examine that cell. It falls. I mount to the cell, with a fellowcitizen who is one
of the Jury, directed by a gaoler. I examine it, very closely. In a hole in the
chimney, where a stone has been worked out and replaced, I find a written
paper. This is that written paper. I have made it my business to examine some
specimens of the writing of Doctor Manette. This is the writing of Doctor
Manette. I confide this paper, in the writing of Doctor Manette, to the hands of
the President."
"Let it be read."
In a dead silence and stillnessthe prisoner under trial looking lovingly at his
wife, his wife only looking from him to look with solicitude at her father,
Doctor Manette keeping his eyes fixed on the reader, Madame Defarge never
taking hers from the prisoner, Defarge never taking his from his feasting wife,
and all the other eyes there intent upon the Doctor, who saw none of themthe
paper was read, as follows.

X.
The Substance of the Shadow

"I, Alexandre Manette, unfortunate physician, native of Beauvais, and
afterwards resident in Paris, write this melancholy paper in my doleful cell in
the Bastille, during the last month of the year, 1767. I write it at stolen
intervals, under every difficulty. I design to secrete it in the wall of the
chimney, where I have slowly and laboriously made a place of concealment
for it. Some pitying hand may find it there, when I and my sorrows are dust.

"These words are formed by the rusty iron point with which I write with
difficulty in scrapings of soot and charcoal from the chimney, mixed with
blood, in the last month of the tenth year of my captivity. Hope has quite
departed from my breast. I know from terrible warnings I have noted in myself
that my reason will not long remain unimpaired, but I solemnly declare that I
am at this time in the possession of my right mindthat my memory is exact and
circumstantialand that I write the truth as I shall answer for these my last
recorded words, whether they be ever read by men or not, at the Eternal
Judgmentseat.
"One cloudy moonlight night, in the third week of December (I think the
twentysecond of the month) in the year 1757, I was walking on a retired part
of the quay by the Seine for the refreshment of the frosty air, at an hour's
distance from my place of residence in the Street of the School of Medicine,
when a carriage came along behind me, driven very fast. As I stood aside to let
that carriage pass, apprehensive that it might otherwise run me down, a head
was put out at the window, and a voice called to the driver to stop.
"The carriage stopped as soon as the driver could rein in his horses, and the
same voice called to me by my name. I answered. The carriage was then so far
in advance of me that two gentlemen had time to open the door and alight
before I came up with it.
"I observed that they were both wrapped in cloaks, and appeared to conceal
themselves. As they stood side by side near the carriage door, I also observed
that they both looked of about my own age, or rather younger, and that they
were greatly alike, in stature, manner, voice, and (as far as I could see) face
too.
"'You are Doctor Manette?' said one.
"I am."
"'Doctor Manette, formerly of Beauvais,' said the other; 'the young physician,
originally an expert surgeon, who within the last year or two has made a rising
reputation in Paris?'
"'Gentlemen,' I returned, 'I am that Doctor Manette of whom you speak so
graciously.'
"'We have been to your residence,' said the first, 'and not being so fortunate as
to find you there, and being informed that you were probably walking in this
direction, we followed, in the hope of overtaking you. Will you please to enter
the carriage?'

"The manner of both was imperious, and they both moved, as these words
were spoken, so as to place me between themselves and the carriage door.
They were armed. I was not.
"'Gentlemen,' said I, 'pardon me; but I usually inquire who does me the honour
to seek my assistance, and what is the nature of the case to which I am
summoned.'
"The reply to this was made by him who had spoken second. 'Doctor, your
clients are people of condition. As to the nature of the case, our confidence in
your skill assures us that you will ascertain it for yourself better than we can
describe it. Enough. Will you please to enter the carriage?'
"I could do nothing but comply, and I entered it in silence. They both entered
after methe last springing in, after putting up the steps. The carriage turned
about, and drove on at its former speed.
"I repeat this conversation exactly as it occurred. I have no doubt that it is,
word for word, the same. I describe everything exactly as it took place,
constraining my mind not to wander from the task. Where I make the broken
marks that follow here, I leave off for the time, and put my paper in its
hidingplace.
"The carriage left the streets behind, passed the North Barrier, and emerged
upon the country road. At twothirds of a league from the BarrierI did not
estimate the distance at that time, but afterwards when I traversed itit struck
out of the main avenue, and presently stopped at a solitary house, We all three
alighted, and walked, by a damp soft footpath in a garden where a neglected
fountain had overflowed, to the door of the house. It was not opened
immediately, in answer to the ringing of the bell, and one of my two
conductors struck the man who opened it, with his heavy riding glove, across
the face.
"There was nothing in this action to attract my particular attention, for I had
seen common people struck more commonly than dogs. But, the other of the
two, being angry likewise, struck the man in like manner with his arm; the
look and bearing of the brothers were then so exactly alike, that I then first
perceived them to be twin brothers.
"From the time of our alighting at the outer gate (which we found locked, and
which one of the brothers had opened to admit us, and had relocked), I had
heard cries proceeding from an upper chamber. I was conducted to this
chamber straight, the cries growing louder as we ascended the stairs, and I
found a patient in a high fever of the brain, lying on a bed.

"The patient was a woman of great beauty, and young; assuredly not much
past twenty. Her hair was torn and ragged, and her arms were bound to her
sides with sashes and handkerchiefs. I noticed that these bonds were all
portions of a gentleman's dress. On one of them, which was a fringed scarf for
a dress of ceremony, I saw the armorial bearings of a Noble, and the letter E.
"I saw this, within the first minute of my contemplation of the patient; for, in
her restless strivings she had turned over on her face on the edge of the bed,
had drawn the end of the scarf into her mouth, and was in danger of
suffocation. My first act was to put out my hand to relieve her breathing; and
in moving the scarf aside, the embroidery in the corner caught my sight.
"I turned her gently over, placed my hands upon her breast to calm her and
keep her down, and looked into her face. Her eyes were dilated and wild, and
she constantly uttered piercing shrieks, and repeated the words, 'My husband,
my father, and my brother!' and then counted up to twelve, and said, 'Hush!'
For an instant, and no more, she would pause to listen, and then the piercing
shrieks would begin again, and she would repeat the cry, 'My husband, my
father, and my brother!' and would count up to twelve, and say, 'Hush!' There
was no variation in the order, or the manner. There was no cessation, but the
regular moment's pause, in the utterance of these sounds.
"'How long,' I asked, 'has this lasted?'
"To distinguish the brothers, I will call them the elder and the younger; by the
elder, I mean him who exercised the most authority. It was the elder who
replied, 'Since about this hour last night.'
"'She has a husband, a father, and a brother?'
"'A brother.'
"'I do not address her brother?'
"He answered with great contempt, 'No.'
"'She has some recent association with the number twelve?'
"The younger brother impatiently rejoined, 'With twelve o'clock?'
"'See, gentlemen,' said I, still keeping my hands upon her breast, 'how useless I
am, as you have brought me! If I had known what I was coming to see, I could
have come provided. As it is, time must be lost. There are no medicines to be
obtained in this lonely place.'
"The elder brother looked to the younger, who said haughtily, 'There is a case

of medicines here;' and brought it from a closet, and put it on the table.
"I opened some of the bottles, smelt them, and put the stoppers to my lips. If I
had wanted to use anything save narcotic medicines that were poisons in
themselves, I would not have administered any of those.
"'Do you doubt them?' asked the younger brother.
"'You see, monsieur, I am going to use them,' I replied, and said no more.
"I made the patient swallow, with great difficulty, and after many efforts, the
dose that I desired to give. As I intended to repeat it after a while, and as it was
necessary to watch its influence, I then sat down by the side of the bed. There
was a timid and suppressed woman in attendance (wife of the man
downstairs), who had retreated into a corner. The house was damp and
decayed, indifferently furnishedevidently, recently occupied and temporarily
used. Some thick old hangings had been nailed up before the windows, to
deaden the sound of the shrieks. They continued to be uttered in their regular
succession, with the cry, 'My husband, my father, and my brother!' the
counting up to twelve, and 'Hush!' The frenzy was so violent, that I had not
unfastened the bandages restraining the arms; but, I had looked to them, to see
that they were not painful. The only spark of encouragement in the case, was,
that my hand upon the sufferer's breast had this much soothing influence, that
for minutes at a time it tranquillised the figure. It had no effect upon the cries;
no pendulum could be more regular.
"For the reason that my hand had this effect (I assume), I had sat by the side of
the bed for half an hour, with the two brothers looking on, before the elder
said:
"'There is another patient.'
"I was startled, and asked, 'Is it a pressing case?'
"'You had better see,' he carelessly answered; and took up a light.
"The other patient lay in a back room across a second staircase, which was a
species of loft over a stable. There was a low plastered ceiling to a part of it;
the rest was open, to the ridge of the tiled roof, and there were beams across.
Hay and straw were stored in that portion of the place, fagots for firing, and a
heap of apples in sand. I had to pass through that part, to get at the other. My
memory is circumstantial and unshaken. I try it with these details, and I see
them all, in this my cell in the Bastille, near the close of the tenth year of my
captivity, as I saw them all that night.
"On some hay on the ground, with a cushion thrown under his head, lay a

handsome peasant boya boy of not more than seventeen at the most. He lay on
his back, with his teeth set, his right hand clenched on his breast, and his
glaring eyes looking straight upward. I could not see where his wound was, as
I kneeled on one knee over him; but, I could see that he was dying of a wound
from a sharp point.
"'I am a doctor, my poor fellow,' said I. 'Let me examine it.'
"'I do not want it examined,' he answered; 'let it be.'
"It was under his hand, and I soothed him to let me move his hand away. The
wound was a swordthrust, received from twenty to twentyfour hours before,
but no skill could have saved him if it had been looked to without delay. He
was then dying fast. As I turned my eyes to the elder brother, I saw him
looking down at this handsome boy whose life was ebbing out, as if he were a
wounded bird, or hare, or rabbit; not at all as if he were a fellowcreature.
"'How has this been done, monsieur?' said I.
"'A crazed young common dog! A serf! Forced my brother to draw upon him,
and has fallen by my brother's swordlike a gentleman.'
"There was no touch of pity, sorrow, or kindred humanity, in this answer. The
speaker seemed to acknowledge that it was inconvenient to have that different
order of creature dying there, and that it would have been better if he had died
in the usual obscure routine of his vermin kind. He was quite incapable of any
compassionate feeling about the boy, or about his fate.
"The boy's eyes had slowly moved to him as he had spoken, and they now
slowly moved to me.
"'Doctor, they are very proud, these Nobles; but we common dogs are proud
too, sometimes. They plunder us, outrage us, beat us, kill us; but we have a
little pride left, sometimes. Shehave you seen her, Doctor?'
"The shrieks and the cries were audible there, though subdued by the distance.
He referred to them, as if she were lying in our presence.
"I said, 'I have seen her.'
"'She is my sister, Doctor. They have had their shameful rights, these Nobles,
in the modesty and virtue of our sisters, many years, but we have had good
girls among us. I know it, and have heard my father say so. She was a good
girl. She was betrothed to a good young man, too: a tenant of his. We were all
tenants of histhat man's who stands there. The other is his brother, the worst of
a bad race.'

"It was with the greatest difficulty that the boy gathered bodily force to speak;
but, his spirit spoke with a dreadful emphasis.
"'We were so robbed by that man who stands there, as all we common dogs are
by those superior Beingstaxed by him without mercy, obliged to work for him
without pay, obliged to grind our corn at his mill, obliged to feed scores of his
tame birds on our wretched crops, and forbidden for our lives to keep a single
tame bird of our own, pillaged and plundered to that degree that when we
chanced to have a bit of meat, we ate it in fear, with the door barred and the
shutters closed, that his people should not see it and take it from usI say, we
were so robbed, and hunted, and were made so poor, that our father told us it
was a dreadful thing to bring a child into the world, and that what we should
most pray for, was, that our women might be barren and our miserable race die
out!'
"I had never before seen the sense of being oppressed, bursting forth like a
fire. I had supposed that it must be latent in the people somewhere; but, I had
never seen it break out, until I saw it in the dying boy.
"'Nevertheless, Doctor, my sister married. He was ailing at that time, poor
fellow, and she married her lover, that she might tend and comfort him in our
cottageour doghut, as that man would call it. She had not been married many
weeks, when that man's brother saw her and admired her, and asked that man
to lend her to himfor what are husbands among us! He was willing enough,
but my sister was good and virtuous, and hated his brother with a hatred as
strong as mine. What did the two then, to persuade her husband to use his
influence with her, to make her willing?'
"The boy's eyes, which had been fixed on mine, slowly turned to the lookeron,
and I saw in the two faces that all he said was true. The two opposing kinds of
pride confronting one another, I can see, even in this Bastille; the gentleman's,
all negligent indifference; the peasant's, all troddendown sentiment, and
passionate revenge.
"'You know, Doctor, that it is among the Rights of these Nobles to harness us
common dogs to carts, and drive us. They so harnessed him and drove him.
You know that it is among their Rights to keep us in their grounds all night,
quieting the frogs, in order that their noble sleep may not be disturbed. They
kept him out in the unwholesome mists at night, and ordered him back into his
harness in the day. But he was not persuaded. No! Taken out of harness one
day at noon, to feedif he could find foodhe sobbed twelve times, once for
every stroke of the bell, and died on her bosom.'
"Nothing human could have held life in the boy but his determination to tell

all his wrong. He forced back the gathering shadows of death, as he forced his
clenched right hand to remain clenched, and to cover his wound.
"'Then, with that man's permission and even with his aid, his brother took her
away; in spite of what I know she must have told his brotherand what that is,
will not be long unknown to you, Doctor, if it is nowhis brother took her
awayfor his pleasure and diversion, for a little while. I saw her pass me on the
road. When I took the tidings home, our father's heart burst; he never spoke
one of the words that filled it. I took my young sister (for I have another) to a
place beyond the reach of this man, and where, at least, she will never be his
vassal. Then, I tracked the brother here, and last night climbed ina common
dog, but sword in hand.Where is the loft window? It was somewhere here?'
"The room was darkening to his sight; the world was narrowing around him. I
glanced about me, and saw that the hay and straw were trampled over the
floor, as if there had been a struggle.
"'She heard me, and ran in. I told her not to come near us till he was dead. He
came in and first tossed me some pieces of money; then struck at me with a
whip. But I, though a common dog, so struck at him as to make him draw. Let
him break into as many pieces as he will, the sword that he stained with my
common blood; he drew to defend himselfthrust at me with all his skill for his
life.'
"My glance had fallen, but a few moments before, on the fragments of a
broken sword, lying among the hay. That weapon was a gentleman's. In
another place, lay an old sword that seemed to have been a soldier's.
"'Now, lift me up, Doctor; lift me up. Where is he?'
"'He is not here,' I said, supporting the boy, and thinking that he referred to the
brother.
"'He! Proud as these nobles are, he is afraid to see me. Where is the man who
was here? Turn my face to him.'
"I did so, raising the boy's head against my knee. But, invested for the moment
with extraordinary power, he raised himself completely: obliging me to rise
too, or I could not have still supported him.
"'Marquis,' said the boy, turned to him with his eyes opened wide, and his right
hand raised, 'in the days when all these things are to be answered for, I
summon you and yours, to the last of your bad race, to answer for them. I
mark this cross of blood upon you, as a sign that I do it. In the days when all
these things are to be answered for, I summon your brother, the worst of the

bad race, to answer for them separately. I mark this cross of blood upon him,
as a sign that I do it.'
"Twice, he put his hand to the wound in his breast, and with his forefinger
drew a cross in the air. He stood for an instant with the finger yet raised, and
as it dropped, he dropped with it, and I laid him down dead.
"When I returned to the bedside of the young woman, I found her raving in
precisely the same order of continuity. I knew that this might last for many
hours, and that it would probably end in the silence of the grave.
"I repeated the medicines I had given her, and I sat at the side of the bed until
the night was far advanced. She never abated the piercing quality of her
shrieks, never stumbled in the distinctness or the order of her words. They
were always 'My husband, my father, and my brother! One, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve. Hush!'
"This lasted twentysix hours from the time when I first saw her. I had come
and gone twice, and was again sitting by her, when she began to falter. I did
what little could be done to assist that opportunity, and byandbye she sank into
a lethargy, and lay like the dead.
"It was as if the wind and rain had lulled at last, after a long and fearful storm.
I released her arms, and called the woman to assist me to compose her figure
and the dress she had torn. It was then that I knew her condition to be that of
one in whom the first expectations of being a mother have arisen; and it was
then that I lost the little hope I had had of her.
"'Is she dead?' asked the Marquis, whom I will still describe as the elder
brother, coming booted into the room from his horse.
"'Not dead,' said I; 'but like to die.'
"'What strength there is in these common bodies!' he said, looking down at her
with some curiosity.
"'There is prodigious strength,' I answered him, 'in sorrow and despair.'
"He first laughed at my words, and then frowned at them. He moved a chair
with his foot near to mine, ordered the woman away, and said in a subdued
voice,
"'Doctor, finding my brother in this difficulty with these hinds, I recommended
that your aid should be invited. Your reputation is high, and, as a young man
with your fortune to make, you are probably mindful of your interest. The
things that you see here, are things to be seen, and not spoken of.'

"I listened to the patient's breathing, and avoided answering.
"'Do you honour me with your attention, Doctor?'
"'Monsieur,' said I, 'in my profession, the communications of patients are
always received in confidence.' I was guarded in my answer, for I was troubled
in my mind with what I had heard and seen.
"Her breathing was so difficult to trace, that I carefully tried the pulse and the
heart. There was life, and no more. Looking round as I resumed my seat, I
found both the brothers intent upon me.
"I write with so much difficulty, the cold is so severe, I am so fearful of being
detected and consigned to an underground cell and total darkness, that I must
abridge this narrative. There is no confusion or failure in my memory; it can
recall, and could detail, every word that was ever spoken between me and
those brothers.
"She lingered for a week. Towards the last, I could understand some few
syllables that she said to me, by placing my ear close to her lips. She asked me
where she was, and I told her; who I was, and I told her. It was in vain that I
asked her for her family name. She faintly shook her head upon the pillow, and
kept her secret, as the boy had done.
"I had no opportunity of asking her any question, until I had told the brothers
she was sinking fast, and could not live another day. Until then, though no one
was ever presented to her consciousness save the woman and myself, one or
other of them had always jealously sat behind the curtain at the head of the
bed when I was there. But when it came to that, they seemed careless what
communication I might hold with her; as ifthe thought passed through my
mindI were dying too.
"I always observed that their pride bitterly resented the younger brother's (as I
call him) having crossed swords with a peasant, and that peasant a boy. The
only consideration that appeared to affect the mind of either of them was the
consideration that this was highly degrading to the family, and was ridiculous.
As often as I caught the younger brother's eyes, their expression reminded me
that he disliked me deeply, for knowing what I knew from the boy. He was
smoother and more polite to me than the elder; but I saw this. I also saw that I
was an incumbrance in the mind of the elder, too.
"My patient died, two hours before midnightat a time, by my watch, answering
almost to the minute when I had first seen her. I was alone with her, when her
forlorn young head drooped gently on one side, and all her earthly wrongs and
sorrows ended.

"The brothers were waiting in a room downstairs, impatient to ride away. I had
heard them, alone at the bedside, striking their boots with their ridingwhips,
and loitering up and down.
"'At last she is dead?' said the elder, when I went in.
"'She is dead,' said I.
"'I congratulate you, my brother,' were his words as he turned round.
"He had before offered me money, which I had postponed taking. He now
gave me a rouleau of gold. I took it from his hand, but laid it on the table. I
had considered the question, and had resolved to accept nothing.
"'Pray excuse me,' said I. 'Under the circumstances, no.'
"They exchanged looks, but bent their heads to me as I bent mine to them, and
we parted without another word on either side.
"I am weary, weary, wearyworn down by misery. I cannot read what I have
written with this gaunt hand.
"Early in the morning, the rouleau of gold was left at my door in a little box,
with my name on the outside. From the first, I had anxiously considered what I
ought to do. I decided, that day, to write privately to the Minister, stating the
nature of the two cases to which I had been summoned, and the place to which
I had gone: in effect, stating all the circumstances. I knew what Court
influence was, and what the immunities of the Nobles were, and I expected
that the matter would never be heard of; but, I wished to relieve my own mind.
I had kept the matter a profound secret, even from my wife; and this, too, I
resolved to state in my letter. I had no apprehension whatever of my real
danger; but I was conscious that there might be danger for others, if others
were compromised by possessing the knowledge that I possessed.
"I was much engaged that day, and could not complete my letter that night. I
rose long before my usual time next morning to finish it. It was the last day of
the year. The letter was lying before me just completed, when I was told that a
lady waited, who wished to see me.
"I am growing more and more unequal to the task I have set myself. It is so
cold, so dark, my senses are so benumbed, and the gloom upon me is so
dreadful.
"The lady was young, engaging, and handsome, but not marked for long life.
She was in great agitation. She presented herself to me as the wife of the
Marquis St. Evremonde. I connected the title by which the boy had addressed

the elder brother, with the initial letter embroidered on the scarf, and had no
difficulty in arriving at the conclusion that I had seen that nobleman very
lately.
"My memory is still accurate, but I cannot write the words of our
conversation. I suspect that I am watched more closely than I was, and I know
not at what times I may be watched. She had in part suspected, and in part
discovered, the main facts of the cruel story, of her husband's share in it, and
my being resorted to. She did not know that the girl was dead. Her hope had
been, she said in great distress, to show her, in secret, a woman's sympathy.
Her hope had been to avert the wrath of Heaven from a House that had long
been hateful to the suffering many.
"She had reasons for believing that there was a young sister living, and her
greatest desire was, to help that sister. I could tell her nothing but that there
was such a sister; beyond that, I knew nothing. Her inducement to come to me,
relying on my confidence, had been the hope that I could tell her the name and
place of abode. Whereas, to this wretched hour I am ignorant of both.
"These scraps of paper fail me. One was taken from me, with a warning,
yesterday. I must finish my record today.
"She was a good, compassionate lady, and not happy in her marriage. How
could she be! The brother distrusted and disliked her, and his influence was all
opposed to her; she stood in dread of him, and in dread of her husband too.
When I handed her down to the door, there was a child, a pretty boy from two
to three years old, in her carriage.
"'For his sake, Doctor,' she said, pointing to him in tears, 'I would do all I can
to make what poor amends I can. He will never prosper in his inheritance
otherwise. I have a presentiment that if no other innocent atonement is made
for this, it will one day be required of him. What I have left to call my ownit is
little beyond the worth of a few jewelsI will make it the first charge of his life
to bestow, with the compassion and lamenting of his dead mother, on this
injured family, if the sister can be discovered.'
"She kissed the boy, and said, caressing him, 'It is for thine own dear sake.
Thou wilt be faithful, little Charles?' The child answered her bravely, 'Yes!' I
kissed her hand, and she took him in her arms, and went away caressing him. I
never saw her more.
"As she had mentioned her husband's name in the faith that I knew it, I added
no mention of it to my letter. I sealed my letter, and, not trusting it out of my
own hands, delivered it myself that day.

"That night, the last night of the year, towards nine o'clock, a man in a black
dress rang at my gate, demanded to see me, and softly followed my servant,
Ernest Defarge, a youth, upstairs. When my servant came into the room where
I sat with my wifeO my wife, beloved of my heart! My fair young English
wife!we saw the man, who was supposed to be at the gate, standing silent
behind him.
"An urgent case in the Rue St. Honore, he said. It would not detain me, he had
a coach in waiting.
"It brought me here, it brought me to my grave. When I was clear of the house,
a black muffler was drawn tightly over my mouth from behind, and my arms
were pinioned. The two brothers crossed the road from a dark corner, and
identified me with a single gesture. The Marquis took from his pocket the
letter I had written, showed it me, burnt it in the light of a lantern that was
held, and extinguished the ashes with his foot. Not a word was spoken. I was
brought here, I was brought to my living grave.
"If it had pleased God to put it in the hard heart of either of the brothers, in all
these frightful years, to grant me any tidings of my dearest wifeso much as to
let me know by a word whether alive or deadI might have thought that He had
not quite abandoned them. But, now I believe that the mark of the red cross is
fatal to them, and that they have no part in His mercies. And them and their
descendants, to the last of their race, I, Alexandre Manette, unhappy prisoner,
do this last night of the year 1767, in my unbearable agony, denounce to the
times when all these things shall be answered for. I denounce them to Heaven
and to earth."
A terrible sound arose when the reading of this document was done. A sound
of craving and eagerness that had nothing articulate in it but blood. The
narrative called up the most revengeful passions of the time, and there was not
a head in the nation but must have dropped before it.
Little need, in presence of that tribunal and that auditory, to show how the
Defarges had not made the paper public, with the other captured Bastille
memorials borne in procession, and had kept it, biding their time. Little need
to show that this detested family name had long been anathematised by Saint
Antoine, and was wrought into the fatal register. The man never trod ground
whose virtues and services would have sustained him in that place that day,
against such denunciation.
And all the worse for the doomed man, that the denouncer was a wellknown
citizen, his own attached friend, the father of his wife. One of the frenzied
aspirations of the populace was, for imitations of the questionable public

virtues of antiquity, and for sacrifices and selfimmolations on the people's
altar. Therefore when the President said (else had his own head quivered on
his shoulders), that the good physician of the Republic would deserve better
still of the Republic by rooting out an obnoxious family of Aristocrats, and
would doubtless feel a sacred glow and joy in making his daughter a widow
and her child an orphan, there was wild excitement, patriotic fervour, not a
touch of human sympathy.
"Much influence around him, has that Doctor?" murmured Madame Defarge,
smiling to The Vengeance. "Save him now, my Doctor, save him!"
At every juryman's vote, there was a roar. Another and another. Roar and roar.
Unanimously voted. At heart and by descent an Aristocrat, an enemy of the
Republic, a notorious oppressor of the People. Back to the Conciergerie, and
Death within fourandtwenty hours!

XI.
Dusk

The wretched wife of the innocent man thus doomed to die, fell under the
sentence, as if she had been mortally stricken. But, she uttered no sound; and
so strong was the voice within her, representing that it was she of all the world
who must uphold him in his misery and not augment it, that it quickly raised
her, even from that shock.
The Judges having to take part in a public demonstration out of doors, the
Tribunal adjourned. The quick noise and movement of the court's emptying
itself by many passages had not ceased, when Lucie stood stretching out her
arms towards her husband, with nothing in her face but love and consolation.
"If I might touch him! If I might embrace him once! O, good citizens, if you
would have so much compassion for us!"
There was but a gaoler left, along with two of the four men who had taken him
last night, and Barsad. The people had all poured out to the show in the streets.
Barsad proposed to the rest, "Let her embrace him then; it is but a moment." It
was silently acquiesced in, and they passed her over the seats in the hall to a
raised place, where he, by leaning over the dock, could fold her in his arms.
"Farewell, dear darling of my soul. My parting blessing on my love. We shall

meet again, where the weary are at rest!"
They were her husband's words, as he held her to his bosom.
"I can bear it, dear Charles. I am supported from above: don't suffer for me. A
parting blessing for our child."
"I send it to her by you. I kiss her by you. I say farewell to her by you."
"My husband. No! A moment!" He was tearing himself apart from her. "We
shall not be separated long. I feel that this will break my heart byandbye; but I
will do my duty while I can, and when I leave her, God will raise up friends
for her, as He did for me."
Her father had followed her, and would have fallen on his knees to both of
them, but that Darnay put out a hand and seized him, crying:
"No, no! What have you done, what have you done, that you should kneel to
us! We know now, what a struggle you made of old. We know, now what you
underwent when you suspected my descent, and when you knew it. We know
now, the natural antipathy you strove against, and conquered, for her dear
sake. We thank you with all our hearts, and all our love and duty. Heaven be
with you!"
Her father's only answer was to draw his hands through his white hair, and
wring them with a shriek of anguish.
"It could not be otherwise," said the prisoner. "All things have worked together
as they have fallen out. It was the alwaysvain endeavour to discharge my poor
mother's trust that first brought my fatal presence near you. Good could never
come of such evil, a happier end was not in nature to so unhappy a beginning.
Be comforted, and forgive me. Heaven bless you!"
As he was drawn away, his wife released him, and stood looking after him
with her hands touching one another in the attitude of prayer, and with a
radiant look upon her face, in which there was even a comforting smile. As he
went out at the prisoners' door, she turned, laid her head lovingly on her
father's breast, tried to speak to him, and fell at his feet.
Then, issuing from the obscure corner from which he had never moved,
Sydney Carton came and took her up. Only her father and Mr. Lorry were with
her. His arm trembled as it raised her, and supported her head. Yet, there was
an air about him that was not all of pitythat had a flush of pride in it.
"Shall I take her to a coach? I shall never feel her weight."

He carried her lightly to the door, and laid her tenderly down in a coach. Her
father and their old friend got into it, and he took his seat beside the driver.
When they arrived at the gateway where he had paused in the dark not many
hours before, to picture to himself on which of the rough stones of the street
her feet had trodden, he lifted her again, and carried her up the staircase to
their rooms. There, he laid her down on a couch, where her child and Miss
Pross wept over her.
"Don't recall her to herself," he said, softly, to the latter, "she is better so. Don't
revive her to consciousness, while she only faints."
"Oh, Carton, Carton, dear Carton!" cried little Lucie, springing up and
throwing her arms passionately round him, in a burst of grief. "Now that you
have come, I think you will do something to help mamma, something to save
papa! O, look at her, dear Carton! Can you, of all the people who love her,
bear to see her so?"
He bent over the child, and laid her blooming cheek against his face. He put
her gently from him, and looked at her unconscious mother.
"Before I go," he said, and paused"I may kiss her?"
It was remembered afterwards that when he bent down and touched her face
with his lips, he murmured some words. The child, who was nearest to him,
told them afterwards, and told her grandchildren when she was a handsome
old lady, that she heard him say, "A life you love."
When he had gone out into the next room, he turned suddenly on Mr. Lorry
and her father, who were following, and said to the latter:
"You had great influence but yesterday, Doctor Manette; let it at least be tried.
These judges, and all the men in power, are very friendly to you, and very
recognisant of your services; are they not?"
"Nothing connected with Charles was concealed from me. I had the strongest
assurances that I should save him; and I did." He returned the answer in great
trouble, and very slowly.
"Try them again. The hours between this and tomorrow afternoon are few and
short, but try."
"I intend to try. I will not rest a moment."
"That's well. I have known such energy as yours do great things before
nowthough never," he added, with a smile and a sigh together, "such great

things as this. But try! Of little worth as life is when we misuse it, it is worth
that effort. It would cost nothing to lay down if it were not."
"I will go," said Doctor Manette, "to the Prosecutor and the President straight,
and I will go to others whom it is better not to name. I will write too, andBut
stay! There is a Celebration in the streets, and no one will be accessible until
dark."
"That's true. Well! It is a forlorn hope at the best, and not much the forlorner
for being delayed till dark. I should like to know how you speed; though,
mind! I expect nothing! When are you likely to have seen these dread powers,
Doctor Manette?"
"Immediately after dark, I should hope. Within an hour or two from this."
"It will be dark soon after four. Let us stretch the hour or two. If I go to Mr.
Lorry's at nine, shall I hear what you have done, either from our friend or from
yourself?"
"Yes."
"May you prosper!"
Mr. Lorry followed Sydney to the outer door, and, touching him on the
shoulder as he was going away, caused him to turn.
"I have no hope," said Mr. Lorry, in a low and sorrowful whisper.
"Nor have I."
"If any one of these men, or all of these men, were disposed to spare himwhich
is a large supposition; for what is his life, or any man's to them!I doubt if they
durst spare him after the demonstration in the court."
"And so do I. I heard the fall of the axe in that sound."
Mr. Lorry leaned his arm upon the doorpost, and bowed his face upon it.
"Don't despond," said Carton, very gently; "don't grieve. I encouraged Doctor
Manette in this idea, because I felt that it might one day be consolatory to her.
Otherwise, she might think 'his life was wantonly thrown away or wasted,' and
that might trouble her."
"Yes, yes, yes," returned Mr. Lorry, drying his eyes, "you are right. But he will
perish; there is no real hope."
"Yes. He will perish: there is no real hope," echoed Carton.

And walked with a settled step, downstairs.

XII.
Darkness

Sydney Carton paused in the street, not quite decided where to go. "At
Tellson's bankinghouse at nine," he said, with a musing face. "Shall I do well,
in the mean time, to show myself? I think so. It is best that these people should
know there is such a man as I here; it is a sound precaution, and may be a
necessary preparation. But care, care, care! Let me think it out!"
Checking his steps which had begun to tend towards an object, he took a turn
or two in the already darkening street, and traced the thought in his mind to its
possible consequences. His first impression was confirmed. "It is best," he
said, finally resolved, "that these people should know there is such a man as I
here." And he turned his face towards Saint Antoine.
Defarge had described himself, that day, as the keeper of a wineshop in the
Saint Antoine suburb. It was not difficult for one who knew the city well, to
find his house without asking any question. Having ascertained its situation,
Carton came out of those closer streets again, and dined at a place of
refreshment and fell sound asleep after dinner. For the first time in many
years, he had no strong drink. Since last night he had taken nothing but a little
light thin wine, and last night he had dropped the brandy slowly down on Mr.
Lorry's hearth like a man who had done with it.
It was as late as seven o'clock when he awoke refreshed, and went out into the
streets again. As he passed along towards Saint Antoine, he stopped at a
shopwindow where there was a mirror, and slightly altered the disordered
arrangement of his loose cravat, and his coatcollar, and his wild hair. This
done, he went on direct to Defarge's, and went in.
There happened to be no customer in the shop but Jacques Three, of the
restless fingers and the croaking voice. This man, whom he had seen upon the
Jury, stood drinking at the little counter, in conversation with the Defarges,
man and wife. The Vengeance assisted in the conversation, like a regular
member of the establishment.
As Carton walked in, took his seat and asked (in very indifferent French) for a
small measure of wine, Madame Defarge cast a careless glance at him, and

then a keener, and then a keener, and then advanced to him herself, and asked
him what it was he had ordered.
He repeated what he had already said.
"English?" asked Madame Defarge, inquisitively raising her dark eyebrows.
After looking at her, as if the sound of even a single French word were slow to
express itself to him, he answered, in his former strong foreign accent. "Yes,
madame, yes. I am English!"
Madame Defarge returned to her counter to get the wine, and, as he took up a
Jacobin journal and feigned to pore over it puzzling out its meaning, he heard
her say, "I swear to you, like Evremonde!"
Defarge brought him the wine, and gave him Good Evening.
"How?"
"Good evening."
"Oh! Good evening, citizen," filling his glass. "Ah! and good wine. I drink to
the Republic."
Defarge went back to the counter, and said, "Certainly, a little like." Madame
sternly retorted, "I tell you a good deal like." Jacques Three pacifically
remarked, "He is so much in your mind, see you, madame." The amiable
Vengeance added, with a laugh, "Yes, my faith! And you are looking forward
with so much pleasure to seeing him once more tomorrow!"
Carton followed the lines and words of his paper, with a slow forefinger, and
with a studious and absorbed face. They were all leaning their arms on the
counter close together, speaking low. After a silence of a few moments, during
which they all looked towards him without disturbing his outward attention
from the Jacobin editor, they resumed their conversation.
"It is true what madame says," observed Jacques Three. "Why stop? There is
great force in that. Why stop?"
"Well, well," reasoned Defarge, "but one must stop somewhere. After all, the
question is still where?"
"At extermination," said madame.
"Magnificent!" croaked Jacques Three. The Vengeance, also, highly approved.
"Extermination is good doctrine, my wife," said Defarge, rather troubled; "in

general, I say nothing against it. But this Doctor has suffered much; you have
seen him today; you have observed his face when the paper was read."
"I have observed his face!" repeated madame, contemptuously and angrily.
"Yes. I have observed his face. I have observed his face to be not the face of a
true friend of the Republic. Let him take care of his face!"
"And you have observed, my wife," said Defarge, in a deprecatory manner,
"the anguish of his daughter, which must be a dreadful anguish to him!"
"I have observed his daughter," repeated madame; "yes, I have observed his
daughter, more times than one. I have observed her today, and I have observed
her other days. I have observed her in the court, and I have observed her in the
street by the prison. Let me but lift my finger!" She seemed to raise it (the
listener's eyes were always on his paper), and to let it fall with a rattle on the
ledge before her, as if the axe had dropped.
"The citizeness is superb!" croaked the Juryman.
"She is an Angel!" said The Vengeance, and embraced her.
"As to thee," pursued madame, implacably, addressing her husband, "if it
depended on theewhich, happily, it does notthou wouldst rescue this man even
now."
"No!" protested Defarge. "Not if to lift this glass would do it! But I would
leave the matter there. I say, stop there."
"See you then, Jacques," said Madame Defarge, wrathfully; "and see you, too,
my little Vengeance; see you both! Listen! For other crimes as tyrants and
oppressors, I have this race a long time on my register, doomed to destruction
and extermination. Ask my husband, is that so."
"It is so," assented Defarge, without being asked.
"In the beginning of the great days, when the Bastille falls, he finds this paper
of today, and he brings it home, and in the middle of the night when this place
is clear and shut, we read it, here on this spot, by the light of this lamp. Ask
him, is that so."
"It is so," assented Defarge.
"That night, I tell him, when the paper is read through, and the lamp is burnt
out, and the day is gleaming in above those shutters and between those iron
bars, that I have now a secret to communicate. Ask him, is that so."
"It is so," assented Defarge again.

"I communicate to him that secret. I smite this bosom with these two hands as
I smite it now, and I tell him, 'Defarge, I was brought up among the fishermen
of the seashore, and that peasant family so injured by the two Evremonde
brothers, as that Bastille paper describes, is my family. Defarge, that sister of
the mortally wounded boy upon the ground was my sister, that husband was
my sister's husband, that unborn child was their child, that brother was my
brother, that father was my father, those dead are my dead, and that summons
to answer for those things descends to me!' Ask him, is that so."
"It is so," assented Defarge once more.
"Then tell Wind and Fire where to stop," returned madame; "but don't tell me."
Both her hearers derived a horrible enjoyment from the deadly nature of her
wraththe listener could feel how white she was, without seeing herand both
highly commended it. Defarge, a weak minority, interposed a few words for
the memory of the compassionate wife of the Marquis; but only elicited from
his own wife a repetition of her last reply. "Tell the Wind and the Fire where to
stop; not me!"
Customers entered, and the group was broken up. The English customer paid
for what he had had, perplexedly counted his change, and asked, as a stranger,
to be directed towards the National Palace. Madame Defarge took him to the
door, and put her arm on his, in pointing out the road. The English customer
was not without his reflections then, that it might be a good deed to seize that
arm, lift it, and strike under it sharp and deep.
But, he went his way, and was soon swallowed up in the shadow of the prison
wall. At the appointed hour, he emerged from it to present himself in Mr.
Lorry's room again, where he found the old gentleman walking to and fro in
restless anxiety. He said he had been with Lucie until just now, and had only
left her for a few minutes, to come and keep his appointment. Her father had
not been seen, since he quitted the bankinghouse towards four o'clock. She
had some faint hopes that his mediation might save Charles, but they were
very slight. He had been more than five hours gone: where could he be?
Mr. Lorry waited until ten; but, Doctor Manette not returning, and he being
unwilling to leave Lucie any longer, it was arranged that he should go back to
her, and come to the bankinghouse again at midnight. In the meanwhile,
Carton would wait alone by the fire for the Doctor.
He waited and waited, and the clock struck twelve; but Doctor Manette did not
come back. Mr. Lorry returned, and found no tidings of him, and brought
none. Where could he be?

They were discussing this question, and were almost building up some weak
structure of hope on his prolonged absence, when they heard him on the stairs.
The instant he entered the room, it was plain that all was lost.
Whether he had really been to any one, or whether he had been all that time
traversing the streets, was never known. As he stood staring at them, they
asked him no question, for his face told them everything.
"I cannot find it," said he, "and I must have it. Where is it?"
His head and throat were bare, and, as he spoke with a helpless look straying
all around, he took his coat off, and let it drop on the floor.
"Where is my bench? I have been looking everywhere for my bench, and I
can't find it. What have they done with my work? Time presses: I must finish
those shoes."
They looked at one another, and their hearts died within them.
"Come, come!" said he, in a whimpering miserable way; "let me get to work.
Give me my work."
Receiving no answer, he tore his hair, and beat his feet upon the ground, like a
distracted child.
"Don't torture a poor forlorn wretch," he implored them, with a dreadful cry;
"but give me my work! What is to become of us, if those shoes are not done
tonight?"
Lost, utterly lost!
It was so clearly beyond hope to reason with him, or try to restore him, thatas
if by agreementthey each put a hand upon his shoulder, and soothed him to sit
down before the fire, with a promise that he should have his work presently.
He sank into the chair, and brooded over the embers, and shed tears. As if all
that had happened since the garret time were a momentary fancy, or a dream,
Mr. Lorry saw him shrink into the exact figure that Defarge had had in
keeping.
Affected, and impressed with terror as they both were, by this spectacle of
ruin, it was not a time to yield to such emotions. His lonely daughter, bereft of
her final hope and reliance, appealed to them both too strongly. Again, as if by
agreement, they looked at one another with one meaning in their faces. Carton
was the first to speak:
"The last chance is gone: it was not much. Yes; he had better be taken to her.

But, before you go, will you, for a moment, steadily attend to me? Don't ask
me why I make the stipulations I am going to make, and exact the promise I
am going to exact; I have a reasona good one."
"I do not doubt it," answered Mr. Lorry. "Say on."
The figure in the chair between them, was all the time monotonously rocking
itself to and fro, and moaning. They spoke in such a tone as they would have
used if they had been watching by a sickbed in the night.
Carton stooped to pick up the coat, which lay almost entangling his feet. As he
did so, a small case in which the Doctor was accustomed to carry the lists of
his day's duties, fell lightly on the floor. Carton took it up, and there was a
folded paper in it. "We should look at this!" he said. Mr. Lorry nodded his
consent. He opened it, and exclaimed, "Thank God!"
"What is it?" asked Mr. Lorry, eagerly.
"A moment! Let me speak of it in its place. First," he put his hand in his coat,
and took another paper from it, "that is the certificate which enables me to
pass out of this city. Look at it. You seeSydney Carton, an Englishman?"
Mr. Lorry held it open in his hand, gazing in his earnest face.
"Keep it for me until tomorrow. I shall see him tomorrow, you remember, and
I had better not take it into the prison."
"Why not?"
"I don't know; I prefer not to do so. Now, take this paper that Doctor Manette
has carried about him. It is a similar certificate, enabling him and his daughter
and her child, at any time, to pass the barrier and the frontier! You see?"
"Yes!"
"Perhaps he obtained it as his last and utmost precaution against evil,
yesterday. When is it dated? But no matter; don't stay to look; put it up
carefully with mine and your own. Now, observe! I never doubted until within
this hour or two, that he had, or could have such a paper. It is good, until
recalled. But it may be soon recalled, and, I have reason to think, will be."
"They are not in danger?"
"They are in great danger. They are in danger of denunciation by Madame
Defarge. I know it from her own lips. I have overheard words of that woman's,
tonight, which have presented their danger to me in strong colours. I have lost
no time, and since then, I have seen the spy. He confirms me. He knows that a

woodsawyer, living by the prison wall, is under the control of the Defarges,
and has been rehearsed by Madame Defarge as to his having seen Her"he
never mentioned Lucie's name"making signs and signals to prisoners. It is
easy to foresee that the pretence will be the common one, a prison plot, and
that it will involve her lifeand perhaps her child'sand perhaps her father'sfor
both have been seen with her at that place. Don't look so horrified. You will
save them all."
"Heaven grant I may, Carton! But how?"
"I am going to tell you how. It will depend on you, and it could depend on no
better man. This new denunciation will certainly not take place until after
tomorrow; probably not until two or three days afterwards; more probably a
week afterwards. You know it is a capital crime, to mourn for, or sympathise
with, a victim of the Guillotine. She and her father would unquestionably be
guilty of this crime, and this woman (the inveteracy of whose pursuit cannot
be described) would wait to add that strength to her case, and make herself
doubly sure. You follow me?"
"So attentively, and with so much confidence in what you say, that for the
moment I lose sight," touching the back of the Doctor's chair, "even of this
distress."
"You have money, and can buy the means of travelling to the seacoast as
quickly as the journey can be made. Your preparations have been completed
for some days, to return to England. Early tomorrow have your horses ready,
so that they may be in starting trim at two o'clock in the afternoon."
"It shall be done!"
His manner was so fervent and inspiring, that Mr. Lorry caught the flame, and
was as quick as youth.
"You are a noble heart. Did I say we could depend upon no better man? Tell
her, tonight, what you know of her danger as involving her child and her
father. Dwell upon that, for she would lay her own fair head beside her
husband's cheerfully." He faltered for an instant; then went on as before. "For
the sake of her child and her father, press upon her the necessity of leaving
Paris, with them and you, at that hour. Tell her that it was her husband's last
arrangement. Tell her that more depends upon it than she dare believe, or
hope. You think that her father, even in this sad state, will submit himself to
her; do you not?"
"I am sure of it."

"I thought so. Quietly and steadily have all these arrangements made in the
courtyard here, even to the taking of your own seat in the carriage. The
moment I come to you, take me in, and drive away."
"I understand that I wait for you under all circumstances?"
"You have my certificate in your hand with the rest, you know, and will
reserve my place. Wait for nothing but to have my place occupied, and then
for England!"
"Why, then," said Mr. Lorry, grasping his eager but so firm and steady hand,
"it does not all depend on one old man, but I shall have a young and ardent
man at my side."
"By the help of Heaven you shall! Promise me solemnly that nothing will
influence you to alter the course on which we now stand pledged to one
another."
"Nothing, Carton."
"Remember these words tomorrow: change the course, or delay in itfor any
reasonand no life can possibly be saved, and many lives must inevitably be
sacrificed."
"I will remember them. I hope to do my part faithfully."
"And I hope to do mine. Now, good bye!"
Though he said it with a grave smile of earnestness, and though he even put
the old man's hand to his lips, he did not part from him then. He helped him so
far to arouse the rocking figure before the dying embers, as to get a cloak and
hat put upon it, and to tempt it forth to find where the bench and work were
hidden that it still moaningly besought to have. He walked on the other side of
it and protected it to the courtyard of the house where the afflicted heartso
happy in the memorable time when he had revealed his own desolate heart to
itoutwatched the awful night. He entered the courtyard and remained there for
a few moments alone, looking up at the light in the window of her room.
Before he went away, he breathed a blessing towards it, and a Farewell.

XIII.
Fiftytwo

In the black prison of the Conciergerie, the doomed of the day awaited their
fate. They were in number as the weeks of the year. Fiftytwo were to roll that
afternoon on the lifetide of the city to the boundless everlasting sea. Before
their cells were quit of them, new occupants were appointed; before their
blood ran into the blood spilled yesterday, the blood that was to mingle with
theirs tomorrow was already set apart.
Two score and twelve were told off. From the farmergeneral of seventy, whose
riches could not buy his life, to the seamstress of twenty, whose poverty and
obscurity could not save her. Physical diseases, engendered in the vices and
neglects of men, will seize on victims of all degrees; and the frightful moral
disorder, born of unspeakable suffering, intolerable oppression, and heartless
indifference, smote equally without distinction.
Charles Darnay, alone in a cell, had sustained himself with no flattering
delusion since he came to it from the Tribunal. In every line of the narrative he
had heard, he had heard his condemnation. He had fully comprehended that no
personal influence could possibly save him, that he was virtually sentenced by
the millions, and that units could avail him nothing.
Nevertheless, it was not easy, with the face of his beloved wife fresh before
him, to compose his mind to what it must bear. His hold on life was strong,
and it was very, very hard, to loosen; by gradual efforts and degrees unclosed a
little here, it clenched the tighter there; and when he brought his strength to
bear on that hand and it yielded, this was closed again. There was a hurry, too,
in all his thoughts, a turbulent and heated working of his heart, that contended
against resignation. If, for a moment, he did feel resigned, then his wife and
child who had to live after him, seemed to protest and to make it a selfish
thing.
But, all this was at first. Before long, the consideration that there was no
disgrace in the fate he must meet, and that numbers went the same road
wrongfully, and trod it firmly every day, sprang up to stimulate him. Next
followed the thought that much of the future peace of mind enjoyable by the
dear ones, depended on his quiet fortitude. So, by degrees he calmed into the
better state, when he could raise his thoughts much higher, and draw comfort
down.
Before it had set in dark on the night of his condemnation, he had travelled
thus far on his last way. Being allowed to purchase the means of writing, and a
light, he sat down to write until such time as the prison lamps should be
extinguished.
He wrote a long letter to Lucie, showing her that he had known nothing of her

father's imprisonment, until he had heard of it from herself, and that he had
been as ignorant as she of his father's and uncle's responsibility for that misery,
until the paper had been read. He had already explained to her that his
concealment from herself of the name he had relinquished, was the one
conditionfully intelligible nowthat her father had attached to their betrothal,
and was the one promise he had still exacted on the morning of their marriage.
He entreated her, for her father's sake, never to seek to know whether her
father had become oblivious of the existence of the paper, or had had it
recalled to him (for the moment, or for good), by the story of the Tower, on
that old Sunday under the dear old planetree in the garden. If he had preserved
any definite remembrance of it, there could be no doubt that he had supposed
it destroyed with the Bastille, when he had found no mention of it among the
relics of prisoners which the populace had discovered there, and which had
been described to all the world. He besought herthough he added that he knew
it was needlessto console her father, by impressing him through every tender
means she could think of, with the truth that he had done nothing for which he
could justly reproach himself, but had uniformly forgotten himself for their
joint sakes. Next to her preservation of his own last grateful love and blessing,
and her overcoming of her sorrow, to devote herself to their dear child, he
adjured her, as they would meet in Heaven, to comfort her father.
To her father himself, he wrote in the same strain; but, he told her father that
he expressly confided his wife and child to his care. And he told him this, very
strongly, with the hope of rousing him from any despondency or dangerous
retrospect towards which he foresaw he might be tending.
To Mr. Lorry, he commended them all, and explained his worldly affairs. That
done, with many added sentences of grateful friendship and warm attachment,
all was done. He never thought of Carton. His mind was so full of the others,
that he never once thought of him.
He had time to finish these letters before the lights were put out. When he lay
down on his straw bed, he thought he had done with this world.
But, it beckoned him back in his sleep, and showed itself in shining forms.
Free and happy, back in the old house in Soho (though it had nothing in it like
the real house), unaccountably released and light of heart, he was with Lucie
again, and she told him it was all a dream, and he had never gone away. A
pause of forgetfulness, and then he had even suffered, and had come back to
her, dead and at peace, and yet there was no difference in him. Another pause
of oblivion, and he awoke in the sombre morning, unconscious where he was
or what had happened, until it flashed upon his mind, "this is the day of my
death!"

Thus, had he come through the hours, to the day when the fiftytwo heads were
to fall. And now, while he was composed, and hoped that he could meet the
end with quiet heroism, a new action began in his waking thoughts, which was
very difficult to master.
He had never seen the instrument that was to terminate his life. How high it
was from the ground, how many steps it had, where he would be stood, how
he would be touched, whether the touching hands would be dyed red, which
way his face would be turned, whether he would be the first, or might be the
last: these and many similar questions, in nowise directed by his will, obtruded
themselves over and over again, countless times. Neither were they connected
with fear: he was conscious of no fear. Rather, they originated in a strange
besetting desire to know what to do when the time came; a desire gigantically
disproportionate to the few swift moments to which it referred; a wondering
that was more like the wondering of some other spirit within his, than his own.
The hours went on as he walked to and fro, and the clocks struck the numbers
he would never hear again. Nine gone for ever, ten gone for ever, eleven gone
for ever, twelve coming on to pass away. After a hard contest with that
eccentric action of thought which had last perplexed him, he had got the better
of it. He walked up and down, softly repeating their names to himself. The
worst of the strife was over. He could walk up and down, free from distracting
fancies, praying for himself and for them.
Twelve gone for ever.
He had been apprised that the final hour was Three, and he knew he would be
summoned some time earlier, inasmuch as the tumbrils jolted heavily and
slowly through the streets. Therefore, he resolved to keep Two before his
mind, as the hour, and so to strengthen himself in the interval that he might be
able, after that time, to strengthen others.
Walking regularly to and fro with his arms folded on his breast, a very
different man from the prisoner, who had walked to and fro at La Force, he
heard One struck away from him, without surprise. The hour had measured
like most other hours. Devoutly thankful to Heaven for his recovered
selfpossession, he thought, "There is but another now," and turned to walk
again.
Footsteps in the stone passage outside the door. He stopped.
The key was put in the lock, and turned. Before the door was opened, or as it
opened, a man said in a low voice, in English: "He has never seen me here; I
have kept out of his way. Go you in alone; I wait near. Lose no time!"

The door was quickly opened and closed, and there stood before him face to
face, quiet, intent upon him, with the light of a smile on his features, and a
cautionary finger on his lip, Sydney Carton.
There was something so bright and remarkable in his look, that, for the first
moment, the prisoner misdoubted him to be an apparition of his own
imagining. But, he spoke, and it was his voice; he took the prisoner's hand,
and it was his real grasp.
"Of all the people upon earth, you least expected to see me?" he said.
"I could not believe it to be you. I can scarcely believe it now. You are not"the
apprehension came suddenly into his mind"a prisoner?"
"No. I am accidentally possessed of a power over one of the keepers here, and
in virtue of it I stand before you. I come from heryour wife, dear Darnay."
The prisoner wrung his hand.
"I bring you a request from her."
"What is it?"
"A most earnest, pressing, and emphatic entreaty, addressed to you in the most
pathetic tones of the voice so dear to you, that you well remember."
The prisoner turned his face partly aside.
"You have no time to ask me why I bring it, or what it means; I have no time
to tell you. You must comply with ittake off those boots you wear, and draw
on these of mine."
There was a chair against the wall of the cell, behind the prisoner. Carton,
pressing forward, had already, with the speed of lightning, got him down into
it, and stood over him, barefoot.
"Draw on these boots of mine. Put your hands to them; put your will to them.
Quick!"
"Carton, there is no escaping from this place; it never can be done. You will
only die with me. It is madness."
"It would be madness if I asked you to escape; but do I? When I ask you to
pass out at that door, tell me it is madness and remain here. Change that cravat
for this of mine, that coat for this of mine. While you do it, let me take this
ribbon from your hair, and shake out your hair like this of mine!"

With wonderful quickness, and with a strength both of will and action, that
appeared quite supernatural, he forced all these changes upon him. The
prisoner was like a young child in his hands.
"Carton! Dear Carton! It is madness. It cannot be accomplished, it never can
be done, it has been attempted, and has always failed. I implore you not to add
your death to the bitterness of mine."
"Do I ask you, my dear Darnay, to pass the door? When I ask that, refuse.
There are pen and ink and paper on this table. Is your hand steady enough to
write?"
"It was when you came in."
"Steady it again, and write what I shall dictate. Quick, friend, quick!"
Pressing his hand to his bewildered head, Darnay sat down at the table.
Carton, with his right hand in his breast, stood close beside him.
"Write exactly as I speak."
"To whom do I address it?"
"To no one." Carton still had his hand in his breast.
"Do I date it?"
"No."
The prisoner looked up, at each question. Carton, standing over him with his
hand in his breast, looked down.
"'If you remember,'" said Carton, dictating, "'the words that passed between us,
long ago, you will readily comprehend this when you see it. You do remember
them, I know. It is not in your nature to forget them.'"
He was drawing his hand from his breast; the prisoner chancing to look up in
his hurried wonder as he wrote, the hand stopped, closing upon something.
"Have you written 'forget them'?" Carton asked.
"I have. Is that a weapon in your hand?"
"No; I am not armed."
"What is it in your hand?"
"You shall know directly. Write on; there are but a few words more." He

dictated again. "'I am thankful that the time has come, when I can prove them.
That I do so is no subject for regret or grief.'" As he said these words with his
eyes fixed on the writer, his hand slowly and softly moved down close to the
writer's face.
The pen dropped from Darnay's fingers on the table, and he looked about him
vacantly.
"What vapour is that?" he asked.
"Vapour?"
"Something that crossed me?"
"I am conscious of nothing; there can be nothing here. Take up the pen and
finish. Hurry, hurry!"
As if his memory were impaired, or his faculties disordered, the prisoner made
an effort to rally his attention. As he looked at Carton with clouded eyes and
with an altered manner of breathing, Cartonhis hand again in his breastlooked
steadily at him.
"Hurry, hurry!"
The prisoner bent over the paper, once more.
"'If it had been otherwise;'" Carton's hand was again watchfully and softly
stealing down; "'I never should have used the longer opportunity. If it had been
otherwise;'" the hand was at the prisoner's face; "'I should but have had so
much the more to answer for. If it had been otherwise'" Carton looked at the
pen and saw it was trailing off into unintelligible signs.
Carton's hand moved back to his breast no more. The prisoner sprang up with
a reproachful look, but Carton's hand was close and firm at his nostrils, and
Carton's left arm caught him round the waist. For a few seconds he faintly
struggled with the man who had come to lay down his life for him; but, within
a minute or so, he was stretched insensible on the ground.
Quickly, but with hands as true to the purpose as his heart was, Carton dressed
himself in the clothes the prisoner had laid aside, combed back his hair, and
tied it with the ribbon the prisoner had worn. Then, he softly called, "Enter
there! Come in!" and the Spy presented himself.
"You see?" said Carton, looking up, as he kneeled on one knee beside the
insensible figure, putting the paper in the breast: "is your hazard very great?"
"Mr. Carton," the Spy answered, with a timid snap of his fingers, "my hazard

is not that, in the thick of business here, if you are true to the whole of your
bargain."
"Don't fear me. I will be true to the death."
"You must be, Mr. Carton, if the tale of fiftytwo is to be right. Being made
right by you in that dress, I shall have no fear."
"Have no fear! I shall soon be out of the way of harming you, and the rest will
soon be far from here, please God! Now, get assistance and take me to the
coach."
"You?" said the Spy nervously.
"Him, man, with whom I have exchanged. You go out at the gate by which
you brought me in?"
"Of course."
"I was weak and faint when you brought me in, and I am fainter now you take
me out. The parting interview has overpowered me. Such a thing has happened
here, often, and too often. Your life is in your own hands. Quick! Call
assistance!"
"You swear not to betray me?" said the trembling Spy, as he paused for a last
moment.
"Man, man!" returned Carton, stamping his foot; "have I sworn by no solemn
vow already, to go through with this, that you waste the precious moments
now? Take him yourself to the courtyard you know of, place him yourself in
the carriage, show him yourself to Mr. Lorry, tell him yourself to give him no
restorative but air, and to remember my words of last night, and his promise of
last night, and drive away!"
The Spy withdrew, and Carton seated himself at the table, resting his forehead
on his hands. The Spy returned immediately, with two men.
"How, then?" said one of them, contemplating the fallen figure. "So afflicted
to find that his friend has drawn a prize in the lottery of Sainte Guillotine?"
"A good patriot," said the other, "could hardly have been more afflicted if the
Aristocrat had drawn a blank."
They raised the unconscious figure, placed it on a litter they had brought to the
door, and bent to carry it away.
"The time is short, Evremonde," said the Spy, in a warning voice.

"I know it well," answered Carton. "Be careful of my friend, I entreat you, and
leave me."
"Come, then, my children," said Barsad. "Lift him, and come away!"
The door closed, and Carton was left alone. Straining his powers of listening
to the utmost, he listened for any sound that might denote suspicion or alarm.
There was none. Keys turned, doors clashed, footsteps passed along distant
passages: no cry was raised, or hurry made, that seemed unusual. Breathing
more freely in a little while, he sat down at the table, and listened again until
the clock struck Two.
Sounds that he was not afraid of, for he divined their meaning, then began to
be audible. Several doors were opened in succession, and finally his own. A
gaoler, with a list in his hand, looked in, merely saying, "Follow me,
Evremonde!" and he followed into a large dark room, at a distance. It was a
dark winter day, and what with the shadows within, and what with the
shadows without, he could but dimly discern the others who were brought
there to have their arms bound. Some were standing; some seated. Some were
lamenting, and in restless motion; but, these were few. The great majority
were silent and still, looking fixedly at the ground.
As he stood by the wall in a dim corner, while some of the fiftytwo were
brought in after him, one man stopped in passing, to embrace him, as having a
knowledge of him. It thrilled him with a great dread of discovery; but the man
went on. A very few moments after that, a young woman, with a slight girlish
form, a sweet spare face in which there was no vestige of colour, and large
widely opened patient eyes, rose from the seat where he had observed her
sitting, and came to speak to him.
"Citizen Evremonde," she said, touching him with her cold hand. "I am a poor
little seamstress, who was with you in La Force."
He murmured for answer: "True. I forget what you were accused of?"
"Plots. Though the just Heaven knows that I am innocent of any. Is it likely?
Who would think of plotting with a poor little weak creature like me?"
The forlorn smile with which she said it, so touched him, that tears started
from his eyes.
"I am not afraid to die, Citizen Evremonde, but I have done nothing. I am not
unwilling to die, if the Republic which is to do so much good to us poor, will
profit by my death; but I do not know how that can be, Citizen Evremonde.
Such a poor weak little creature!"

As the last thing on earth that his heart was to warm and soften to, it warmed
and softened to this pitiable girl.
"I heard you were released, Citizen Evremonde. I hoped it was true?"
"It was. But, I was again taken and condemned."
"If I may ride with you, Citizen Evremonde, will you let me hold your hand? I
am not afraid, but I am little and weak, and it will give me more courage."
As the patient eyes were lifted to his face, he saw a sudden doubt in them, and
then astonishment. He pressed the workworn, hungerworn young fingers, and
touched his lips.
"Are you dying for him?" she whispered.
"And his wife and child. Hush! Yes."
"O you will let me hold your brave hand, stranger?"
"Hush! Yes, my poor sister; to the last."
The same shadows that are falling on the prison, are falling, in that same hour
of the early afternoon, on the Barrier with the crowd about it, when a coach
going out of Paris drives up to be examined.
"Who goes here? Whom have we within? Papers!"
The papers are handed out, and read.
"Alexandre Manette. Physician. French. Which is he?"
This is he; this helpless, inarticulately murmuring, wandering old man pointed
out.
"Apparently the CitizenDoctor is not in his right mind? The Revolutionfever
will have been too much for him?"
Greatly too much for him.
"Hah! Many suffer with it. Lucie. His daughter. French. Which is she?"
This is she.
"Apparently it must be. Lucie, the wife of Evremonde; is it not?"
It is.
"Hah! Evremonde has an assignation elsewhere. Lucie, her child. English.

This is she?"
She and no other.
"Kiss me, child of Evremonde. Now, thou hast kissed a good Republican;
something new in thy family; remember it! Sydney Carton. Advocate. English.
Which is he?"
He lies here, in this corner of the carriage. He, too, is pointed out.
"Apparently the English advocate is in a swoon?"
It is hoped he will recover in the fresher air. It is represented that he is not in
strong health, and has separated sadly from a friend who is under the
displeasure of the Republic.
"Is that all? It is not a great deal, that! Many are under the displeasure of the
Republic, and must look out at the little window. Jarvis Lorry. Banker.
English. Which is he?"
"I am he. Necessarily, being the last."
It is Jarvis Lorry who has replied to all the previous questions. It is Jarvis
Lorry who has alighted and stands with his hand on the coach door, replying to
a group of officials. They leisurely walk round the carriage and leisurely
mount the box, to look at what little luggage it carries on the roof; the
countrypeople hanging about, press nearer to the coach doors and greedily
stare in; a little child, carried by its mother, has its short arm held out for it,
that it may touch the wife of an aristocrat who has gone to the Guillotine.
"Behold your papers, Jarvis Lorry, countersigned."
"One can depart, citizen?"
"One can depart. Forward, my postilions! A good journey!"
"I salute you, citizens.And the first danger passed!"
These are again the words of Jarvis Lorry, as he clasps his hands, and looks
upward. There is terror in the carriage, there is weeping, there is the heavy
breathing of the insensible traveller.
"Are we not going too slowly? Can they not be induced to go faster?" asks
Lucie, clinging to the old man.
"It would seem like flight, my darling. I must not urge them too much; it
would rouse suspicion."

"Look back, look back, and see if we are pursued!"
"The road is clear, my dearest. So far, we are not pursued."
Houses in twos and threes pass by us, solitary farms, ruinous buildings,
dyeworks, tanneries, and the like, open country, avenues of leafless trees. The
hard uneven pavement is under us, the soft deep mud is on either side.
Sometimes, we strike into the skirting mud, to avoid the stones that clatter us
and shake us; sometimes, we stick in ruts and sloughs there. The agony of our
impatience is then so great, that in our wild alarm and hurry we are for getting
out and runninghidingdoing anything but stopping.
Out of the open country, in again among ruinous buildings, solitary farms,
dyeworks, tanneries, and the like, cottages in twos and threes, avenues of
leafless trees. Have these men deceived us, and taken us back by another road?
Is not this the same place twice over? Thank Heaven, no. A village. Look
back, look back, and see if we are pursued! Hush! the postinghouse.
Leisurely, our four horses are taken out; leisurely, the coach stands in the little
street, bereft of horses, and with no likelihood upon it of ever moving again;
leisurely, the new horses come into visible existence, one by one; leisurely, the
new postilions follow, sucking and plaiting the lashes of their whips; leisurely,
the old postilions count their money, make wrong additions, and arrive at
dissatisfied results. All the time, our overfraught hearts are beating at a rate
that would far outstrip the fastest gallop of the fastest horses ever foaled.
At length the new postilions are in their saddles, and the old are left behind.
We are through the village, up the hill, and down the hill, and on the low
watery grounds. Suddenly, the postilions exchange speech with animated
gesticulation, and the horses are pulled up, almost on their haunches. We are
pursued?
"Ho! Within the carriage there. Speak then!"
"What is it?" asks Mr. Lorry, looking out at window.
"How many did they say?"
"I do not understand you."
"At the last post. How many to the Guillotine today?"
"Fiftytwo."
"I said so! A brave number! My fellowcitizen here would have it fortytwo; ten
more heads are worth having. The Guillotine goes handsomely. I love it. Hi

forward. Whoop!"
The night comes on dark. He moves more; he is beginning to revive, and to
speak intelligibly; he thinks they are still together; he asks him, by his name,
what he has in his hand. O pity us, kind Heaven, and help us! Look out, look
out, and see if we are pursued.
The wind is rushing after us, and the clouds are flying after us, and the moon
is plunging after us, and the whole wild night is in pursuit of us; but, so far, we
are pursued by nothing else.

XIV.
The Knitting Done

In that same juncture of time when the FiftyTwo awaited their fate Madame
Defarge held darkly ominous council with The Vengeance and Jacques Three
of the Revolutionary Jury. Not in the wineshop did Madame Defarge confer
with these ministers, but in the shed of the woodsawyer, erst a mender of
roads. The sawyer himself did not participate in the conference, but abided at a
little distance, like an outer satellite who was not to speak until required, or to
offer an opinion until invited.
"But our Defarge," said Jacques Three, "is undoubtedly a good Republican?
Eh?"
"There is no better," the voluble Vengeance protested in her shrill notes, "in
France."
"Peace, little Vengeance," said Madame Defarge, laying her hand with a slight
frown on her lieutenant's lips, "hear me speak. My husband, fellowcitizen, is a
good Republican and a bold man; he has deserved well of the Republic, and
possesses its confidence. But my husband has his weaknesses, and he is so
weak as to relent towards this Doctor."
"It is a great pity," croaked Jacques Three, dubiously shaking his head, with
his cruel fingers at his hungry mouth; "it is not quite like a good citizen; it is a
thing to regret."
"See you," said madame, "I care nothing for this Doctor, I. He may wear his
head or lose it, for any interest I have in him; it is all one to me. But, the
Evremonde people are to be exterminated, and the wife and child must follow

the husband and father."
"She has a fine head for it," croaked Jacques Three. "I have seen blue eyes and
golden hair there, and they looked charming when Samson held them up."
Ogre that he was, he spoke like an epicure.
Madame Defarge cast down her eyes, and reflected a little.
"The child also," observed Jacques Three, with a meditative enjoyment of his
words, "has golden hair and blue eyes. And we seldom have a child there. It is
a pretty sight!"
"In a word," said Madame Defarge, coming out of her short abstraction, "I
cannot trust my husband in this matter. Not only do I feel, since last night, that
I dare not confide to him the details of my projects; but also I feel that if I
delay, there is danger of his giving warning, and then they might escape."
"That must never be," croaked Jacques Three; "no one must escape. We have
not half enough as it is. We ought to have six score a day."
"In a word," Madame Defarge went on, "my husband has not my reason for
pursuing this family to annihilation, and I have not his reason for regarding
this Doctor with any sensibility. I must act for myself, therefore. Come hither,
little citizen."
The woodsawyer, who held her in the respect, and himself in the submission,
of mortal fear, advanced with his hand to his red cap.
"Touching those signals, little citizen," said Madame Defarge, sternly, "that
she made to the prisoners; you are ready to bear witness to them this very
day?"
"Ay, ay, why not!" cried the sawyer. "Every day, in all weathers, from two to
four, always signalling, sometimes with the little one, sometimes without. I
know what I know. I have seen with my eyes."
He made all manner of gestures while he spoke, as if in incidental imitation of
some few of the great diversity of signals that he had never seen.
"Clearly plots," said Jacques Three. "Transparently!"
"There is no doubt of the Jury?" inquired Madame Defarge, letting her eyes
turn to him with a gloomy smile.
"Rely upon the patriotic Jury, dear citizeness. I answer for my
fellowJurymen."

"Now, let me see," said Madame Defarge, pondering again. "Yet once more!
Can I spare this Doctor to my husband? I have no feeling either way. Can I
spare him?"
"He would count as one head," observed Jacques Three, in a low voice. "We
really have not heads enough; it would be a pity, I think."
"He was signalling with her when I saw her," argued Madame Defarge; "I
cannot speak of one without the other; and I must not be silent, and trust the
case wholly to him, this little citizen here. For, I am not a bad witness."
The Vengeance and Jacques Three vied with each other in their fervent
protestations that she was the most admirable and marvellous of witnesses.
The little citizen, not to be outdone, declared her to be a celestial witness.
"He must take his chance," said Madame Defarge. "No, I cannot spare him!
You are engaged at three o'clock; you are going to see the batch of today
executed.You?"
The question was addressed to the woodsawyer, who hurriedly replied in the
affirmative: seizing the occasion to add that he was the most ardent of
Republicans, and that he would be in effect the most desolate of Republicans,
if anything prevented him from enjoying the pleasure of smoking his
afternoon pipe in the contemplation of the droll national barber. He was so
very demonstrative herein, that he might have been suspected (perhaps was,
by the dark eyes that looked contemptuously at him out of Madame Defarge's
head) of having his small individual fears for his own personal safety, every
hour in the day.
"I," said madame, "am equally engaged at the same place. After it is oversay at
eight tonightcome you to me, in Saint Antoine, and we will give information
against these people at my Section."
The woodsawyer said he would be proud and flattered to attend the citizeness.
The citizeness looking at him, he became embarrassed, evaded her glance as a
small dog would have done, retreated among his wood, and hid his confusion
over the handle of his saw.
Madame Defarge beckoned the Juryman and The Vengeance a little nearer to
the door, and there expounded her further views to them thus:
"She will now be at home, awaiting the moment of his death. She will be
mourning and grieving. She will be in a state of mind to impeach the justice of
the Republic. She will be full of sympathy with its enemies. I will go to her."
"What an admirable woman; what an adorable woman!" exclaimed Jacques

Three, rapturously. "Ah, my cherished!" cried The Vengeance; and embraced
her.
"Take you my knitting," said Madame Defarge, placing it in her lieutenant's
hands, "and have it ready for me in my usual seat. Keep me my usual chair. Go
you there, straight, for there will probably be a greater concourse than usual,
today."
"I willingly obey the orders of my Chief," said The Vengeance with alacrity,
and kissing her cheek. "You will not be late?"
"I shall be there before the commencement."
"And before the tumbrils arrive. Be sure you are there, my soul," said The
Vengeance, calling after her, for she had already turned into the street, "before
the tumbrils arrive!"
Madame Defarge slightly waved her hand, to imply that she heard, and might
be relied upon to arrive in good time, and so went through the mud, and round
the corner of the prison wall. The Vengeance and the Juryman, looking after
her as she walked away, were highly appreciative of her fine figure, and her
superb moral endowments.
There were many women at that time, upon whom the time laid a dreadfully
disfiguring hand; but, there was not one among them more to be dreaded than
this ruthless woman, now taking her way along the streets. Of a strong and
fearless character, of shrewd sense and readiness, of great determination, of
that kind of beauty which not only seems to impart to its possessor firmness
and animosity, but to strike into others an instinctive recognition of those
qualities; the troubled time would have heaved her up, under any
circumstances. But, imbued from her childhood with a brooding sense of
wrong, and an inveterate hatred of a class, opportunity had developed her into
a tigress. She was absolutely without pity. If she had ever had the virtue in her,
it had quite gone out of her.
It was nothing to her, that an innocent man was to die for the sins of his
forefathers; she saw, not him, but them. It was nothing to her, that his wife was
to be made a widow and his daughter an orphan; that was insufficient
punishment, because they were her natural enemies and her prey, and as such
had no right to live. To appeal to her, was made hopeless by her having no
sense of pity, even for herself. If she had been laid low in the streets, in any of
the many encounters in which she had been engaged, she would not have
pitied herself; nor, if she had been ordered to the axe tomorrow, would she
have gone to it with any softer feeling than a fierce desire to change places
with the man who sent her there.

Such a heart Madame Defarge carried under her rough robe. Carelessly worn,
it was a becoming robe enough, in a certain weird way, and her dark hair
looked rich under her coarse red cap. Lying hidden in her bosom, was a loaded
pistol. Lying hidden at her waist, was a sharpened dagger. Thus accoutred, and
walking with the confident tread of such a character, and with the supple
freedom of a woman who had habitually walked in her girlhood, barefoot and
barelegged, on the brown seasand, Madame Defarge took her way along the
streets.
Now, when the journey of the travelling coach, at that very moment waiting
for the completion of its load, had been planned out last night, the difficulty of
taking Miss Pross in it had much engaged Mr. Lorry's attention. It was not
merely desirable to avoid overloading the coach, but it was of the highest
importance that the time occupied in examining it and its passengers, should
be reduced to the utmost; since their escape might depend on the saving of
only a few seconds here and there. Finally, he had proposed, after anxious
consideration, that Miss Pross and Jerry, who were at liberty to leave the city,
should leave it at three o'clock in the lightestwheeled conveyance known to
that period. Unencumbered with luggage, they would soon overtake the coach,
and, passing it and preceding it on the road, would order its horses in advance,
and greatly facilitate its progress during the precious hours of the night, when
delay was the most to be dreaded.
Seeing in this arrangement the hope of rendering real service in that pressing
emergency, Miss Pross hailed it with joy. She and Jerry had beheld the coach
start, had known who it was that Solomon brought, had passed some ten
minutes in tortures of suspense, and were now concluding their arrangements
to follow the coach, even as Madame Defarge, taking her way through the
streets, now drew nearer and nearer to the elsedeserted lodging in which they
held their consultation.
"Now what do you think, Mr. Cruncher," said Miss Pross, whose agitation was
so great that she could hardly speak, or stand, or move, or live: "what do you
think of our not starting from this courtyard? Another carriage having already
gone from here today, it might awaken suspicion."
"My opinion, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher, "is as you're right. Likewise wot
I'll stand by you, right or wrong."
"I am so distracted with fear and hope for our precious creatures," said Miss
Pross, wildly crying, "that I am incapable of forming any plan. Are you
capable of forming any plan, my dear good Mr. Cruncher?"
"Respectin' a future spear o' life, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher, "I hope so.

Respectin' any present use o' this here blessed old head o' mine, I think not.
Would you do me the favour, miss, to take notice o' two promises and wows
wot it is my wishes fur to record in this here crisis?"
"Oh, for gracious sake!" cried Miss Pross, still wildly crying, "record them at
once, and get them out of the way, like an excellent man."
"First," said Mr. Cruncher, who was all in a tremble, and who spoke with an
ashy and solemn visage, "them poor things well out o' this, never no more will
I do it, never no more!"
"I am quite sure, Mr. Cruncher," returned Miss Pross, "that you never will do it
again, whatever it is, and I beg you not to think it necessary to mention more
particularly what it is."
"No, miss," returned Jerry, "it shall not be named to you. Second: them poor
things well out o' this, and never no more will I interfere with Mrs. Cruncher's
flopping, never no more!"
"Whatever housekeeping arrangement that may be," said Miss Pross, striving
to dry her eyes and compose herself, "I have no doubt it is best that Mrs.
Cruncher should have it entirely under her own superintendence.O my poor
darlings!"
"I go so far as to say, miss, moreover," proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with a most
alarming tendency to hold forth as from a pulpit"and let my words be took
down and took to Mrs. Cruncher through yourselfthat wot my opinions
respectin' flopping has undergone a change, and that wot I only hope with all
my heart as Mrs. Cruncher may be a flopping at the present time."
"There, there, there! I hope she is, my dear man," cried the distracted Miss
Pross, "and I hope she finds it answering her expectations."
"Forbid it," proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with additional solemnity, additional
slowness, and additional tendency to hold forth and hold out, "as anything wot
I have ever said or done should be wisited on my earnest wishes for them poor
creeturs now! Forbid it as we shouldn't all flop (if it was anyways conwenient)
to get 'em out o' this here dismal risk! Forbid it, miss! Wot I say, forbid it!"
This was Mr. Cruncher's conclusion after a protracted but vain endeavour to
find a better one.
And still Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came nearer
and nearer.
"If we ever get back to our native land," said Miss Pross, "you may rely upon
my telling Mrs. Cruncher as much as I may be able to remember and

understand of what you have so impressively said; and at all events you may
be sure that I shall bear witness to your being thoroughly in earnest at this
dreadful time. Now, pray let us think! My esteemed Mr. Cruncher, let us
think!"
Still, Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came nearer and
nearer.
"If you were to go before," said Miss Pross, "and stop the vehicle and horses
from coming here, and were to wait somewhere for me; wouldn't that be
best?"
Mr. Cruncher thought it might be best.
"Where could you wait for me?" asked Miss Pross.
Mr. Cruncher was so bewildered that he could think of no locality but Temple
Bar. Alas! Temple Bar was hundreds of miles away, and Madame Defarge was
drawing very near indeed.
"By the cathedral door," said Miss Pross. "Would it be much out of the way, to
take me in, near the great cathedral door between the two towers?"
"No, miss," answered Mr. Cruncher.
"Then, like the best of men," said Miss Pross, "go to the postinghouse straight,
and make that change."
"I am doubtful," said Mr. Cruncher, hesitating and shaking his head, "about
leaving of you, you see. We don't know what may happen."
"Heaven knows we don't," returned Miss Pross, "but have no fear for me. Take
me in at the cathedral, at Three o'Clock, or as near it as you can, and I am sure
it will be better than our going from here. I feel certain of it. There! Bless you,
Mr. Cruncher! Thinknot of me, but of the lives that may depend on both of
us!"
This exordium, and Miss Pross's two hands in quite agonised entreaty clasping
his, decided Mr. Cruncher. With an encouraging nod or two, he immediately
went out to alter the arrangements, and left her by herself to follow as she had
proposed.
The having originated a precaution which was already in course of execution,
was a great relief to Miss Pross. The necessity of composing her appearance so
that it should attract no special notice in the streets, was another relief. She
looked at her watch, and it was twenty minutes past two. She had no time to

lose, but must get ready at once.
Afraid, in her extreme perturbation, of the loneliness of the deserted rooms,
and of halfimagined faces peeping from behind every open door in them, Miss
Pross got a basin of cold water and began laving her eyes, which were swollen
and red. Haunted by her feverish apprehensions, she could not bear to have her
sight obscured for a minute at a time by the dripping water, but constantly
paused and looked round to see that there was no one watching her. In one of
those pauses she recoiled and cried out, for she saw a figure standing in the
room.
The basin fell to the ground broken, and the water flowed to the feet of
Madame Defarge. By strange stern ways, and through much staining blood,
those feet had come to meet that water.
Madame Defarge looked coldly at her, and said, "The wife of Evremonde;
where is she?"
It flashed upon Miss Pross's mind that the doors were all standing open, and
would suggest the flight. Her first act was to shut them. There were four in the
room, and she shut them all. She then placed herself before the door of the
chamber which Lucie had occupied.
Madame Defarge's dark eyes followed her through this rapid movement, and
rested on her when it was finished. Miss Pross had nothing beautiful about her;
years had not tamed the wildness, or softened the grimness, of her appearance;
but, she too was a determined woman in her different way, and she measured
Madame Defarge with her eyes, every inch.
"You might, from your appearance, be the wife of Lucifer," said Miss Pross, in
her breathing. "Nevertheless, you shall not get the better of me. I am an
Englishwoman."
Madame Defarge looked at her scornfully, but still with something of Miss
Pross's own perception that they two were at bay. She saw a tight, hard, wiry
woman before her, as Mr. Lorry had seen in the same figure a woman with a
strong hand, in the years gone by. She knew full well that Miss Pross was the
family's devoted friend; Miss Pross knew full well that Madame Defarge was
the family's malevolent enemy.
"On my way yonder," said Madame Defarge, with a slight movement of her
hand towards the fatal spot, "where they reserve my chair and my knitting for
me, I am come to make my compliments to her in passing. I wish to see her."
"I know that your intentions are evil," said Miss Pross, "and you may depend

upon it, I'll hold my own against them."
Each spoke in her own language; neither understood the other's words; both
were very watchful, and intent to deduce from look and manner, what the
unintelligible words meant.
"It will do her no good to keep herself concealed from me at this moment,"
said Madame Defarge. "Good patriots will know what that means. Let me see
her. Go tell her that I wish to see her. Do you hear?"
"If those eyes of yours were bedwinches," returned Miss Pross, "and I was an
English fourposter, they shouldn't loose a splinter of me. No, you wicked
foreign woman; I am your match."
Madame Defarge was not likely to follow these idiomatic remarks in detail;
but, she so far understood them as to perceive that she was set at naught.
"Woman imbecile and piglike!" said Madame Defarge, frowning. "I take no
answer from you. I demand to see her. Either tell her that I demand to see her,
or stand out of the way of the door and let me go to her!" This, with an angry
explanatory wave of her right arm.
"I little thought," said Miss Pross, "that I should ever want to understand your
nonsensical language; but I would give all I have, except the clothes I wear, to
know whether you suspect the truth, or any part of it."
Neither of them for a single moment released the other's eyes. Madame
Defarge had not moved from the spot where she stood when Miss Pross first
became aware of her; but, she now advanced one step.
"I am a Briton," said Miss Pross, "I am desperate. I don't care an English
Twopence for myself. I know that the longer I keep you here, the greater hope
there is for my Ladybird. I'll not leave a handful of that dark hair upon your
head, if you lay a finger on me!"
Thus Miss Pross, with a shake of her head and a flash of her eyes between
every rapid sentence, and every rapid sentence a whole breath. Thus Miss
Pross, who had never struck a blow in her life.
But, her courage was of that emotional nature that it brought the irrepressible
tears into her eyes. This was a courage that Madame Defarge so little
comprehended as to mistake for weakness. "Ha, ha!" she laughed, "you poor
wretch! What are you worth! I address myself to that Doctor." Then she raised
her voice and called out, "Citizen Doctor! Wife of Evremonde! Child of
Evremonde! Any person but this miserable fool, answer the Citizeness
Defarge!"

Perhaps the following silence, perhaps some latent disclosure in the expression
of Miss Pross's face, perhaps a sudden misgiving apart from either suggestion,
whispered to Madame Defarge that they were gone. Three of the doors she
opened swiftly, and looked in.
"Those rooms are all in disorder, there has been hurried packing, there are
odds and ends upon the ground. There is no one in that room behind you! Let
me look."
"Never!" said Miss Pross, who understood the request as perfectly as Madame
Defarge understood the answer.
"If they are not in that room, they are gone, and can be pursued and brought
back," said Madame Defarge to herself.
"As long as you don't know whether they are in that room or not, you are
uncertain what to do," said Miss Pross to herself; "and you shall not know that,
if I can prevent your knowing it; and know that, or not know that, you shall
not leave here while I can hold you."
"I have been in the streets from the first, nothing has stopped me, I will tear
you to pieces, but I will have you from that door," said Madame Defarge.
"We are alone at the top of a high house in a solitary courtyard, we are not
likely to be heard, and I pray for bodily strength to keep you here, while every
minute you are here is worth a hundred thousand guineas to my darling," said
Miss Pross.
Madame Defarge made at the door. Miss Pross, on the instinct of the moment,
seized her round the waist in both her arms, and held her tight. It was in vain
for Madame Defarge to struggle and to strike; Miss Pross, with the vigorous
tenacity of love, always so much stronger than hate, clasped her tight, and
even lifted her from the floor in the struggle that they had. The two hands of
Madame Defarge buffeted and tore her face; but, Miss Pross, with her head
down, held her round the waist, and clung to her with more than the hold of a
drowning woman.
Soon, Madame Defarge's hands ceased to strike, and felt at her encircled
waist. "It is under my arm," said Miss Pross, in smothered tones, "you shall
not draw it. I am stronger than you, I bless Heaven for it. I hold you till one or
other of us faints or dies!"
Madame Defarge's hands were at her bosom. Miss Pross looked up, saw what
it was, struck at it, struck out a flash and a crash, and stood aloneblinded with
smoke.

All this was in a second. As the smoke cleared, leaving an awful stillness, it
passed out on the air, like the soul of the furious woman whose body lay
lifeless on the ground.
In the first fright and horror of her situation, Miss Pross passed the body as far
from it as she could, and ran down the stairs to call for fruitless help. Happily,
she bethought herself of the consequences of what she did, in time to check
herself and go back. It was dreadful to go in at the door again; but, she did go
in, and even went near it, to get the bonnet and other things that she must
wear. These she put on, out on the staircase, first shutting and locking the door
and taking away the key. She then sat down on the stairs a few moments to
breathe and to cry, and then got up and hurried away.
By good fortune she had a veil on her bonnet, or she could hardly have gone
along the streets without being stopped. By good fortune, too, she was
naturally so peculiar in appearance as not to show disfigurement like any other
woman. She needed both advantages, for the marks of gripping fingers were
deep in her face, and her hair was torn, and her dress (hastily composed with
unsteady hands) was clutched and dragged a hundred ways.
In crossing the bridge, she dropped the door key in the river. Arriving at the
cathedral some few minutes before her escort, and waiting there, she thought,
what if the key were already taken in a net, what if it were identified, what if
the door were opened and the remains discovered, what if she were stopped at
the gate, sent to prison, and charged with murder! In the midst of these
fluttering thoughts, the escort appeared, took her in, and took her away.
"Is there any noise in the streets?" she asked him.
"The usual noises," Mr. Cruncher replied; and looked surprised by the
question and by her aspect.
"I don't hear you," said Miss Pross. "What do you say?"
It was in vain for Mr. Cruncher to repeat what he said; Miss Pross could not
hear him. "So I'll nod my head," thought Mr. Cruncher, amazed, "at all events
she'll see that." And she did.
"Is there any noise in the streets now?" asked Miss Pross again, presently.
Again Mr. Cruncher nodded his head.
"I don't hear it."
"Gone deaf in an hour?" said Mr. Cruncher, ruminating, with his mind much
disturbed; "wot's come to her?"

"I feel," said Miss Pross, "as if there had been a flash and a crash, and that
crash was the last thing I should ever hear in this life."
"Blest if she ain't in a queer condition!" said Mr. Cruncher, more and more
disturbed. "Wot can she have been a takin', to keep her courage up? Hark!
There's the roll of them dreadful carts! You can hear that, miss?"
"I can hear," said Miss Pross, seeing that he spoke to her, "nothing. O, my
good man, there was first a great crash, and then a great stillness, and that
stillness seems to be fixed and unchangeable, never to be broken any more as
long as my life lasts."
"If she don't hear the roll of those dreadful carts, now very nigh their journey's
end," said Mr. Cruncher, glancing over his shoulder, "it's my opinion that
indeed she never will hear anything else in this world."
And indeed she never did.

XV.
The Footsteps Die Out For Ever

Along the Paris streets, the deathcarts rumble, hollow and harsh. Six tumbrils
carry the day's wine to La Guillotine. All the devouring and insatiate Monsters
imagined since imagination could record itself, are fused in the one realisation,
Guillotine. And yet there is not in France, with its rich variety of soil and
climate, a blade, a leaf, a root, a sprig, a peppercorn, which will grow to
maturity under conditions more certain than those that have produced this
horror. Crush humanity out of shape once more, under similar hammers, and it
will twist itself into the same tortured forms. Sow the same seed of rapacious
license and oppression over again, and it will surely yield the same fruit
according to its kind.
Six tumbrils roll along the streets. Change these back again to what they were,
thou powerful enchanter, Time, and they shall be seen to be the carriages of
absolute monarchs, the equipages of feudal nobles, the toilettes of flaring
Jezebels, the churches that are not my father's house but dens of thieves, the
huts of millions of starving peasants! No; the great magician who majestically
works out the appointed order of the Creator, never reverses his
transformations. "If thou be changed into this shape by the will of God," say
the seers to the enchanted, in the wise Arabian stories, "then remain so! But, if

thou wear this form through mere passing conjuration, then resume thy former
aspect!" Changeless and hopeless, the tumbrils roll along.
As the sombre wheels of the six carts go round, they seem to plough up a long
crooked furrow among the populace in the streets. Ridges of faces are thrown
to this side and to that, and the ploughs go steadily onward. So used are the
regular inhabitants of the houses to the spectacle, that in many windows there
are no people, and in some the occupation of the hands is not so much as
suspended, while the eyes survey the faces in the tumbrils. Here and there, the
inmate has visitors to see the sight; then he points his finger, with something
of the complacency of a curator or authorised exponent, to this cart and to this,
and seems to tell who sat here yesterday, and who there the day before.
Of the riders in the tumbrils, some observe these things, and all things on their
last roadside, with an impassive stare; others, with a lingering interest in the
ways of life and men. Some, seated with drooping heads, are sunk in silent
despair; again, there are some so heedful of their looks that they cast upon the
multitude such glances as they have seen in theatres, and in pictures. Several
close their eyes, and think, or try to get their straying thoughts together. Only
one, and he a miserable creature, of a crazed aspect, is so shattered and made
drunk by horror, that he sings, and tries to dance. Not one of the whole number
appeals by look or gesture, to the pity of the people.
There is a guard of sundry horsemen riding abreast of the tumbrils, and faces
are often turned up to some of them, and they are asked some question. It
would seem to be always the same question, for, it is always followed by a
press of people towards the third cart. The horsemen abreast of that cart,
frequently point out one man in it with their swords. The leading curiosity is,
to know which is he; he stands at the back of the tumbril with his head bent
down, to converse with a mere girl who sits on the side of the cart, and holds
his hand. He has no curiosity or care for the scene about him, and always
speaks to the girl. Here and there in the long street of St. Honore, cries are
raised against him. If they move him at all, it is only to a quiet smile, as he
shakes his hair a little more loosely about his face. He cannot easily touch his
face, his arms being bound.
On the steps of a church, awaiting the comingup of the tumbrils, stands the
Spy and prisonsheep. He looks into the first of them: not there. He looks into
the second: not there. He already asks himself, "Has he sacrificed me?" when
his face clears, as he looks into the third.
"Which is Evremonde?" says a man behind him.
"That. At the back there."

"With his hand in the girl's?"
"Yes."
The man cries, "Down, Evremonde! To the Guillotine all aristocrats! Down,
Evremonde!"
"Hush, hush!" the Spy entreats him, timidly.
"And why not, citizen?"
"He is going to pay the forfeit: it will be paid in five minutes more. Let him be
at peace."
But the man continuing to exclaim, "Down, Evremonde!" the face of
Evremonde is for a moment turned towards him. Evremonde then sees the
Spy, and looks attentively at him, and goes his way.
The clocks are on the stroke of three, and the furrow ploughed among the
populace is turning round, to come on into the place of execution, and end.
The ridges thrown to this side and to that, now crumble in and close behind the
last plough as it passes on, for all are following to the Guillotine. In front of it,
seated in chairs, as in a garden of public diversion, are a number of women,
busily knitting. On one of the foremost chairs, stands The Vengeance, looking
about for her friend.
"Therese!" she cries, in her shrill tones. "Who has seen her? Therese Defarge!"
"She never missed before," says a knittingwoman of the sisterhood.
"No; nor will she miss now," cries The Vengeance, petulantly. "Therese."
"Louder," the woman recommends.
Ay! Louder, Vengeance, much louder, and still she will scarcely hear thee.
Louder yet, Vengeance, with a little oath or so added, and yet it will hardly
bring her. Send other women up and down to seek her, lingering somewhere;
and yet, although the messengers have done dread deeds, it is questionable
whether of their own wills they will go far enough to find her!
"Bad Fortune!" cries The Vengeance, stamping her foot in the chair, "and here
are the tumbrils! And Evremonde will be despatched in a wink, and she not
here! See her knitting in my hand, and her empty chair ready for her. I cry with
vexation and disappointment!"
As The Vengeance descends from her elevation to do it, the tumbrils begin to
discharge their loads. The ministers of Sainte Guillotine are robed and ready.

Crash!A head is held up, and the knittingwomen who scarcely lifted their eyes
to look at it a moment ago when it could think and speak, count One.
The second tumbril empties and moves on; the third comes up. Crash!And the
knittingwomen, never faltering or pausing in their Work, count Two.
The supposed Evremonde descends, and the seamstress is lifted out next after
him. He has not relinquished her patient hand in getting out, but still holds it
as he promised. He gently places her with her back to the crashing engine that
constantly whirrs up and falls, and she looks into his face and thanks him.
"But for you, dear stranger, I should not be so composed, for I am naturally a
poor little thing, faint of heart; nor should I have been able to raise my
thoughts to Him who was put to death, that we might have hope and comfort
here today. I think you were sent to me by Heaven."
"Or you to me," says Sydney Carton. "Keep your eyes upon me, dear child,
and mind no other object."
"I mind nothing while I hold your hand. I shall mind nothing when I let it go,
if they are rapid."
"They will be rapid. Fear not!"
The two stand in the fastthinning throng of victims, but they speak as if they
were alone. Eye to eye, voice to voice, hand to hand, heart to heart, these two
children of the Universal Mother, else so wide apart and differing, have come
together on the dark highway, to repair home together, and to rest in her
bosom.
"Brave and generous friend, will you let me ask you one last question? I am
very ignorant, and it troubles mejust a little."
"Tell me what it is."
"I have a cousin, an only relative and an orphan, like myself, whom I love
very dearly. She is five years younger than I, and she lives in a farmer's house
in the south country. Poverty parted us, and she knows nothing of my fatefor I
cannot writeand if I could, how should I tell her! It is better as it is."
"Yes, yes: better as it is."
"What I have been thinking as we came along, and what I am still thinking
now, as I look into your kind strong face which gives me so much support, is
this:If the Republic really does good to the poor, and they come to be less
hungry, and in all ways to suffer less, she may live a long time: she may even

live to be old."
"What then, my gentle sister?"
"Do you think:" the uncomplaining eyes in which there is so much endurance,
fill with tears, and the lips part a little more and tremble: "that it will seem
long to me, while I wait for her in the better land where I trust both you and I
will be mercifully sheltered?"
"It cannot be, my child; there is no Time there, and no trouble there."
"You comfort me so much! I am so ignorant. Am I to kiss you now? Is the
moment come?"
"Yes."
She kisses his lips; he kisses hers; they solemnly bless each other. The spare
hand does not tremble as he releases it; nothing worse than a sweet, bright
constancy is in the patient face. She goes next before himis gone; the
knittingwomen count TwentyTwo.
"I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord: he that believeth in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in
me shall never die."
The murmuring of many voices, the upturning of many faces, the pressing on
of many footsteps in the outskirts of the crowd, so that it swells forward in a
mass, like one great heave of water, all flashes away. TwentyThree.
They said of him, about the city that night, that it was the peacefullest man's
face ever beheld there. Many added that he looked sublime and prophetic.
One of the most remarkable sufferers by the same axea womanhad asked at the
foot of the same scaffold, not long before, to be allowed to write down the
thoughts that were inspiring her. If he had given any utterance to his, and they
were prophetic, they would have been these:
"I see Barsad, and Cly, Defarge, The Vengeance, the Juryman, the Judge, long
ranks of the new oppressors who have risen on the destruction of the old,
perishing by this retributive instrument, before it shall cease out of its present
use. I see a beautiful city and a brilliant people rising from this abyss, and, in
their struggles to be truly free, in their triumphs and defeats, through long
years to come, I see the evil of this time and of the previous time of which this
is the natural birth, gradually making expiation for itself and wearing out.
"I see the lives for which I lay down my life, peaceful, useful, prosperous and

happy, in that England which I shall see no more. I see Her with a child upon
her bosom, who bears my name. I see her father, aged and bent, but otherwise
restored, and faithful to all men in his healing office, and at peace. I see the
good old man, so long their friend, in ten years' time enriching them with all
he has, and passing tranquilly to his reward.
"I see that I hold a sanctuary in their hearts, and in the hearts of their
descendants, generations hence. I see her, an old woman, weeping for me on
the anniversary of this day. I see her and her husband, their course done, lying
side by side in their last earthly bed, and I know that each was not more
honoured and held sacred in the other's soul, than I was in the souls of both.
"I see that child who lay upon her bosom and who bore my name, a man
winning his way up in that path of life which once was mine. I see him
winning it so well, that my name is made illustrious there by the light of his. I
see the blots I threw upon it, faded away. I see him, foremost of just judges
and honoured men, bringing a boy of my name, with a forehead that I know
and golden hair, to this placethen fair to look upon, with not a trace of this
day's disfigurementand I hear him tell the child my story, with a tender and a
faltering voice.
"It is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done; it is a far, far better
rest that I go to than I have ever known."
What Christmas is as We Grow
Older
By
Charles Dickens

What Christmas is as We Grow Older
Time was, with most of us, when Christmas Day encircling all our limited
world like a magic ring, left nothing out for us to miss or seek; bound together
all our home enjoyments, affections, and hopes; grouped everything and every
one around the Christmas fire; and made the little picture shining in our bright
young eyes, complete.
Time came, perhaps, all so soon, when our thoughts over-leaped that
narrow boundary; when there was some one (very dear, we thought then, very
beautiful, and absolutely perfect) wanting to the fulness of our happiness;
when we were wanting too (or we thought so, which did just as well) at the
Christmas hearth by which that some one sat; and when we intertwined with
every wreath and garland of our life that some ones name.
That was the time for the bright visionary Christmases which have long
arisen from us to show faintly, after summer rain, in the palest edges of the
rainbow! That was the time for the beatified enjoyment of the things that were
to be, and never were, and yet the things that were so real in our resolute hope
that it would be hard to say, now, what realities achieved since, have been
stronger!
What! Did that Christmas never really come when we and the priceless
pearl who was our young choice were received, after the happiest of totally
impossible marriages, by the two united families previously at daggers
drawn on our account? When brothers and sisters-in-law who had always been
rather cool to us before our relationship was effected, perfectly doted on us,
and when fathers and mothers overwhelmed us with unlimited incomes? Was
that Christmas dinner never really eaten, after which we arose, and generously
and eloquently rendered honour to our late rival, present in the company, then
and there exchanging friendship and forgiveness, and founding an attachment,
not to be surpassed in Greek or Roman story, which subsisted until death? Has
that same rival long ceased to care for that same priceless pearl, and married
for money, and become usurious? Above all, do we really know, now, that we
should probably have been miserable if we had won and worn the pearl, and
that we are better without her?
That Christmas when we had recently achieved so much fame; when we
had been carried in triumph somewhere, for doing something great and good;
when we had won an honoured and ennobled name, and arrived and were
received at home in a shower of tears of joy; is it possible that that Christmas
has not come yet?
And is our life here, at the best, so constituted that, pausing as we advance

at such a noticeable mile-stone in the track as this great birthday, we look back
on the things that never were, as naturally and full as gravely as on the things
that have been and are gone, or have been and still are? If it be so, and so it
seems to be, must we come to the conclusion that life is little better than a
dream, and little worth the loves and strivings that we crowd into it?
No! Far be such miscalled philosophy from us, dear Reader, on Christmas
Day! Nearer and closer to our hearts be the Christmas spirit, which is the spirit
of active usefulness, perseverance, cheerful discharge of duty, kindness and
forbearance! It is in the last virtues especially, that we are, or should be,
strengthened by the unaccomplished visions of our youth; for, who shall say
that they are not our teachers to deal gently even with the impalpable nothings
of the earth!
Therefore, as we grow older, let us be more thankful that the circle of our
Christmas associations and of the lessons that they bring, expands! Let us
welcome every one of them, and summon them to take their places by the
Christmas hearth.
Welcome, old aspirations, glittering creatures of an ardent fancy, to your
shelter underneath the holly! We know you, and have not outlived you yet.
Welcome, old projects and old loves, however fleeting, to your nooks among
the steadier lights that burn around us. Welcome, all that was ever real to our
hearts; and for the earnestness that made you real, thanks to Heaven! Do we
build no Christmas castles in the clouds now? Let our thoughts, fluttering like
butterflies among these flowers of children, bear witness! Before this boy,
there stretches out a Future, brighter than we ever looked on in our old
romantic time, but bright with honour and with truth. Around this little head
on which the sunny curls lie heaped, the graces sport, as prettily, as airily, as
when there was no scythe within the reach of Time to shear away the curls of
our first-love. Upon another girls face near itplacider but smiling brighta
quiet and contented little face, we see Home fairly written. Shining from the
word, as rays shine from a star, we see how, when our graves are old, other
hopes than ours are young, other hearts than ours are moved; how other ways
are smoothed; how other happiness blooms, ripens, and decaysno, not
decays, for other homes and other bands of children, not yet in being nor for
ages yet to be, arise, and bloom and ripen to the end of all!
Welcome, everything! Welcome, alike what has been, and what never was,
and what we hope may be, to your shelter underneath the holly, to your places
round the Christmas fire, where what is sits open- hearted! In yonder shadow,
do we see obtruding furtively upon the blaze, an enemys face? By Christmas
Day we do forgive him! If the injury he has done us may admit of such
companionship, let him come here and take his place. If otherwise, unhappily,
let him go hence, assured that we will never injure nor accuse him.

On this day we shut out Nothing!
Pause, says a low voice. Nothing? Think!
On Christmas Day, we will shut out from our fireside, Nothing.
Not the shadow of a vast City where the withered leaves are lying deep?
the voice replies. Not the shadow that darkens the whole globe? Not the
shadow of the City of the Dead?
Not even that. Of all days in the year, we will turn our faces towards that
City upon Christmas Day, and from its silent hosts bring those we loved,
among us. City of the Dead, in the blessed name wherein we are gathered
together at this time, and in the Presence that is here among us according to
the promise, we will receive, and not dismiss, thy people who are dear to us!
Yes. We can look upon these children angels that alight, so solemnly, so
beautifully among the living children by the fire, and can bear to think how
they departed from us. Entertaining angels unawares, as the Patriarchs did, the
playful children are unconscious of their guests; but we can see themcan see
a radiant arm around one favourite neck, as if there were a tempting of that
child away. Among the celestial figures there is one, a poor misshapen boy on
earth, of a glorious beauty now, of whom his dying mother said it grieved her
much to leave him here, alone, for so many years as it was likely would elapse
before he came to her being such a little child. But he went quickly, and was
laid upon her breast, and in her hand she leads him.
There was a gallant boy, who fell, far away, upon a burning sand beneath a
burning sun, and said, Tell them at home, with my last love, how much I
could have wished to kiss them once, but that I died contented and had done
my duty! Or there was another, over whom they read the words, Therefore
we commit his body to the deep, and so consigned him to the lonely ocean
and sailed on. Or there was another, who lay down to his rest in the dark
shadow of great forests, and, on earth, awoke no more. O shall they not, from
sand and sea and forest, be brought home at such a time!
There was a dear girlalmost a womannever to be onewho made a
mourning Christmas in a house of joy, and went her trackless way to the silent
City. Do we recollect her, worn out, faintly whispering what could not be
heard, and falling into that last sleep for weariness? O look upon her now! O
look upon her beauty, her serenity, her changeless youth, her happiness! The
daughter of Jairus was recalled to life, to die; but she, more blest, has heard the
same voice, saying unto her, Arise for ever!
We had a friend who was our friend from early days, with whom we often
pictured the changes that were to come upon our lives, and merrily imagined
how we would speak, and walk, and think, and talk, when we came to be old.

His destined habitation in the City of the Dead received him in his prime.
Shall he be shut out from our Christmas remembrance? Would his love have
so excluded us? Lost friend, lost child, lost parent, sister, brother, husband,
wife, we will not so discard you! You shall hold your cherished places in our
Christmas hearts, and by our Christmas fires; and in the season of immortal
hope, and on the birthday of immortal mercy, we will shut out Nothing!
The winter sun goes down over town and village; on the sea it makes a
rosy path, as if the Sacred tread were fresh upon the water. A few more
moments, and it sinks, and night comes on, and lights begin to sparkle in the
prospect. On the hill-side beyond the shapelessly-diffused town, and in the
quiet keeping of the trees that gird the village-steeple, remembrances are cut in
stone, planted in common flowers, growing in grass, entwined with lowly
brambles around many a mound of earth. In town and village, there are doors
and windows closed against the weather, there are flaming logs heaped high,
there are joyful faces, there is healthy music of voices. Be all ungentleness and
harm excluded from the temples of the Household Gods, but be those
remembrances admitted with tender encouragement! They are of the time and
all its comforting and peaceful reassurances; and of the history that re-united
even upon earth the living and the dead; and of the broad beneficence and
goodness that too many men have tried to tear to narrow shreds.

Nobodys Story
He lived on the bank of a mighty river, broad and deep, which was always
silently rolling on to a vast undiscovered ocean. It had rolled on, ever since the
world began. It had changed its course sometimes, and turned into new
channels, leaving its old ways dry and barren; but it had ever been upon the
flow, and ever was to flow until Time should be no more. Against its strong,
unfathomable stream, nothing made head. No living creature, no flower, no
leaf, no particle of animate or inanimate existence, ever strayed back from the
undiscovered ocean. The tide of the river set resistlessly towards it; and the
tide never stopped, any more than the earth stops in its circling round the sun.
He lived in a busy place, and he worked very hard to live. He had no hope
of ever being rich enough to live a month without hard work, but he was quite
content, GOD knows, to labour with a cheerful will. He was one of an
immense family, all of whose sons and daughters gained their daily bread by
daily work, prolonged from their rising up betimes until their lying down at
night. Beyond this destiny he had no prospect, and he sought none.
There was over-much drumming, trumpeting, and speech-making, in the

neighbourhood where he dwelt; but he had nothing to do with that. Such clash
and uproar came from the Bigwig family, at the unaccountable proceedings of
which race, he marvelled much. They set up the strangest statues, in iron,
marble, bronze, and brass, before his door; and darkened his house with the
legs and tails of uncouth images of horses. He wondered what it all meant,
smiled in a rough good-humoured way he had, and kept at his hard work.
The Bigwig family (composed of all the stateliest people thereabouts, and
all the noisiest) had undertaken to save him the trouble of thinking for himself,
and to manage him and his affairs. "Why truly," said he, "I have little time
upon my hands; and if you will be so good as to take care of me, in return for
the money I pay over"--for the Bigwig family were not above his money--"I
shall be relieved and much obliged, considering that you know best." Hence
the drumming, trumpeting, and speech-making, and the ugly images of horses
which he was expected to fall down and worship.
"I don't understand all this," said he, rubbing his furrowed brow
confusedly. "But it HAS a meaning, maybe, if I could find it out."
"It means," returned the Bigwig family, suspecting something of what he
said, "honour and glory in the highest, to the highest merit."
"Oh!" said he. And he was glad to hear that.
But, when he looked among the images in iron, marble, bronze, and brass,
he failed to find a rather meritorious countryman of his, once the son of a
Warwickshire wool-dealer, or any single countryman whomsoever of that
kind. He could find none of the men whose knowledge had rescued him and
his children from terrific and disfiguring disease, whose boldness had raised
his forefathers from the condition of serfs, whose wise fancy had opened a
new and high existence to the humblest, whose skill had filled the working
man's world with accumulated wonders. Whereas, he did find others whom he
knew no good of, and even others whom he knew much ill of.
"Humph!" said he. "I don't quite understand it."
So, he went home, and sat down by his fireside to get it out of his mind.
Now, his fireside was a bare one, all hemmed in by blackened streets; but it
was a precious place to him. The hands of his wife were hardened with toil,
and she was old before her time; but she was dear to him. His children, stunted
in their growth, bore traces of unwholesome nurture; but they had beauty in
his sight. Above all other things, it was an earnest desire of this man's soul that
his children should be taught. "If I am sometimes misled," said he, "for want
of knowledge, at least let them know better, and avoid my mistakes. If it is
hard to me to reap the harvest of pleasure and instruction that is stored in
books, let it be easier to them."

But, the Bigwig family broke out into violent family quarrels concerning
what it was lawful to teach to this man's children. Some of the family insisted
on such a thing being primary and indispensable above all other things; and
others of the family insisted on such another thing being primary and
indispensable above all other things; and the Bigwig family, rent into factions,
wrote pamphlets, held convocations, delivered charges, orations, and all
varieties of discourses; impounded one another in courts Lay and courts
Ecclesiastical; threw dirt, exchanged pummelings, and fell together by the ears
in unintelligible animosity. Meanwhile, this man, in his short evening snatches
at his fireside, saw the demon Ignorance arise there, and take his children to
itself. He saw his daughter perverted into a heavy, slatternly drudge; he saw
his son go moping down the ways of low sensuality, to brutality and crime; he
saw the dawning light of intelligence in the eyes of his babies so changing into
cunning and suspicion, that he could have rather wished them idiots.
"I don't understand this any the better," said he; "but I think it cannot be
right. Nay, by the clouded Heaven above me, I protest against this as my
wrong!"
Becoming peaceable again (for his passion was usually short-lived, and his
nature kind), he looked about him on his Sundays and holidays, and he saw
how much monotony and weariness there was, and thence how drunkenness
arose with all its train of ruin. Then he appealed to the Bigwig family, and
said, "We are a labouring people, and I have a glimmering suspicion in me that
labouring people of whatever condition were made--by a higher intelligence
than yours, as I poorly understand it--to be in need of mental refreshment and
recreation. See what we fall into, when we rest without it. Come! Amuse me
harmlessly, show me something, give me an escape!"
But, here the Bigwig family fell into a state of uproar absolutely deafening.
When some few voices were faintly heard, proposing to show him the
wonders of the world, the greatness of creation, the mighty changes of time,
the workings of nature and the beauties of art--to show him these things, that
is to say, at any period of his life when he could look upon them--there arose
among the Bigwigs such roaring and raving, such pulpiting and petitioning,
such maundering and memorialising, such name-calling and dirt-throwing,
such a shrill wind of parliamentary questioning and feeble replying- -where "I
dare not" waited on "I would"--that the poor fellow stood aghast, staring
wildly around.
"Have I provoked all this," said he, with his hands to his affrighted ears,
"by what was meant to be an innocent request, plainly arising out of my
familiar experience, and the common knowledge of all men who choose to
open their eyes? I don't understand, and I am not understood. What is to come
of such a state of things!"

He was bending over his work, often asking himself the question, when the
news began to spread that a pestilence had appeared among the labourers, and
was slaying them by thousands. Going forth to look about him, he soon found
this to be true. The dying and the dead were mingled in the close and tainted
houses among which his life was passed. New poison was distilled into the
always murky, always sickening air. The robust and the weak, old age and
infancy, the father and the mother, all were stricken down alike.
What means of flight had he? He remained there, where he was, and saw
those who were dearest to him die. A kind preacher came to him, and would
have said some prayers to soften his heart in his gloom, but he replied:
"O what avails it, missionary, to come to me, a man condemned to
residence in this foetid place, where every sense bestowed upon me for my
delight becomes a torment, and where every minute of my numbered days is
new mire added to the heap under which I lie oppressed! But, give me my first
glimpse of Heaven, through a little of its light and air; give me pure water;
help me to be clean; lighten this heavy atmosphere and heavy life, in which
our spirits sink, and we become the indifferent and callous creatures you too
often see us; gently and kindly take the bodies of those who die among us, out
of the small room where we grow to be so familiar with the awful change that
even its sanctity is lost to us; and, Teacher, then I will hear--none know better
than you, how willingly- -of Him whose thoughts were so much with the poor,
and who had compassion for all human sorrow!"
He was at work again, solitary and sad, when his Master came and stood
near to him dressed in black. He, also, had suffered heavily. His young wife,
his beautiful and good young wife, was dead; so, too, his only child.
"Master, 'tis hard to bear--I know it--but be comforted. I would give you
comfort, if I could."
The Master thanked him from his heart, but, said he, "O you labouring
men! The calamity began among you. If you had but lived more healthily and
decently, I should not be the widowed and bereft mourner that I am this day."
"Master," returned the other, shaking his head, "I have begun to understand
a little that most calamities will come from us, as this one did, and that none
will stop at our poor doors, until we are united with that great squabbling
family yonder, to do the things that are right. We cannot live healthily and
decently, unless they who undertook to manage us provide the means. We
cannot be instructed unless they will teach us; we cannot be rationally amused,
unless they will amuse us; we cannot but have some false gods of our own,
while they set up so many of theirs in all the public places. The evil
consequences of imperfect instruction, the evil consequences of pernicious
neglect, the evil consequences of unnatural restraint and the denial of

humanising enjoyments, will all come from us, and none of them will stop
with us. They will spread far and wide. They always do; they always have
done--just like the pestilence. I understand so much, I think, at last."
But the Master said again, "O you labouring men! How seldom do we ever
hear of you, except in connection with some trouble!"
"Master," he replied, "I am Nobody, and little likely to be heard of (nor yet
much wanted to be heard of, perhaps), except when there is some trouble. But
it never begins with me, and it never can end with me. As sure as Death, it
comes down to me, and it goes up from me."
There was so much reason in what he said, that the Bigwig family, getting
wind of it, and being horribly frightened by the late desolation, resolved to
unite with him to do the things that were right--at all events, so far as the said
things were associated with the direct prevention, humanly speaking, of
another pestilence. But, as their fear wore off, which it soon began to do, they
resumed their falling out among themselves, and did nothing. Consequently
the scourge appeared again--low down as before--and spread avengingly
upward as before, and carried off vast numbers of the brawlers. But not a man
among them ever admitted, if in the least degree he ever perceived, that he had
anything to do with it.
So Nobody lived and died in the old, old, old way; and this, in the main, is
the whole of Nobody's story.
Had he no name, you ask? Perhaps it was Legion. It matters little what his
name was. Let us call him Legion.
If you were ever in the Belgian villages near the field of Waterloo, you will
have seen, in some quiet little church, a monument erected by faithful
companions in arms to the memory of Colonel A, Major B, Captains C, D and
E, Lieutenants F and G, Ensigns H, I and J, seven non-commissioned officers,
and one hundred and thirty rank and file, who fell in the discharge of their
duty on the memorable day. The story of Nobody is the story of the rank and
file of the earth. They bear their share of the battle; they have their part in the
victory; they fall; they leave no name but in the mass. The march of the
proudest of us, leads to the dusty way by which they go. O! Let us think of
them this year at the Christmas fire, and not forget them when it is burnt out.

The Poor Relation's Story
He was very reluctant to take precedence of so many respected members of
the family, by beginning the round of stories they were to relate as they sat in a

goodly circle by the Christmas fire; and he modestly suggested that it would
be more correct if "John our esteemed host" (whose health he begged to drink)
would have the kindness to begin. For as to himself, he said, he was so little
used to lead the way that really-- But as they all cried out here, that he must
begin, and agreed with one voice that he might, could, would, and should
begin, he left off rubbing his hands, and took his legs out from under his
armchair, and did begin.
I have no doubt (said the poor relation) that I shall surprise the assembled
members of our family, and particularly John our esteemed host to whom we
are so much indebted for the great hospitality with which he has this day
entertained us, by the confession I am going to make. But, if you do me the
honour to be surprised at anything that falls from a person so unimportant in
the family as I am, I can only say that I shall be scrupulously accurate in all I
relate.
I am not what I am supposed to be. I am quite another thing. Perhaps
before I go further, I had better glance at what I AM supposed to be.
It is supposed, unless I mistake--the assembled members of our family will
correct me if I do, which is very likely (here the poor relation looked mildly
about him for contradiction); that I am nobody's enemy but my own. That I
never met with any particular success in anything. That I failed in business
because I was unbusiness-like and credulous--in not being prepared for the
interested designs of my partner. That I failed in love, because I was
ridiculously trustful--in thinking it impossible that Christiana could deceive
me. That I failed in my expectations from my uncle Chill, on account of not
being as sharp as he could have wished in worldly matters. That, through life,
I have been rather put upon and disappointed in a general way. That I am at
present a bachelor of between fifty-nine and sixty years of age, living on a
limited income in the form of a quarterly allowance, to which I see that John
our esteemed host wishes me to make no further allusion.
The supposition as to my present pursuits and habits is to the following
effect.
I live in a lodging in the Clapham Road--a very clean back room, in a very
respectable house--where I am expected not to be at home in the day-time,
unless poorly; and which I usually leave in the morning at nine o'clock, on
pretence of going to business. I take my breakfast--my roll and butter, and my
half-pint of coffee--at the old-established coffee-shop near Westminster
Bridge; and then I go into the City--I don't know why--and sit in Garraway's
Coffee House, and on 'Change, and walk about, and look into a few offices
and counting-houses where some of my relations or acquaintance are so good
as to tolerate me, and where I stand by the fire if the weather happens to be

cold. I get through the day in this way until five o'clock, and then I dine: at a
cost, on the average, of one and threepence. Having still a little money to
spend on my evening's entertainment, I look into the old-established coffeeshop as I go home, and take my cup of tea, and perhaps my bit of toast. So, as
the large hand of the clock makes its way round to the morning hour again, I
make my way round to the Clapham Road again, and go to bed when I get to
my lodging--fire being expensive, and being objected to by the family on
account of its giving trouble and making a dirt.
Sometimes, one of my relations or acquaintances is so obliging as to ask
me to dinner. Those are holiday occasions, and then I generally walk in the
Park. I am a solitary man, and seldom walk with anybody. Not that I am
avoided because I am shabby; for I am not at all shabby, having always a very
good suit of black on (or rather Oxford mixture, which has the appearance of
black and wears much better); but I have got into a habit of speaking low, and
being rather silent, and my spirits are not high, and I am sensible that I am not
an attractive companion.
The only exception to this general rule is the child of my first cousin, Little
Frank. I have a particular affection for that child, and he takes very kindly to
me. He is a diffident boy by nature; and in a crowd he is soon run over, as I
may say, and forgotten. He and I, however, get on exceedingly well. I have a
fancy that the poor child will in time succeed to my peculiar position in the
family. We talk but little; still, we understand each other. We walk about, hand
in hand; and without much speaking he knows what I mean, and I know what
he means. When he was very little indeed, I used to take him to the windows
of the toy-shops, and show him the toys inside. It is surprising how soon he
found out that I would have made him a great many presents if I had been in
circumstances to do it.
Little Frank and I go and look at the outside of the Monument--he is very
fond of the Monument--and at the Bridges, and at all the sights that are free.
On two of my birthdays, we have dined on e-la-mode beef, and gone at halfprice to the play, and been deeply interested. I was once walking with him in
Lombard Street, which we often visit on account of my having mentioned to
him that there are great riches there--he is very fond of Lombard Street--when
a gentleman said to me as he passed by, "Sir, your little son has dropped his
glove." I assure you, if you will excuse my remarking on so trivial a
circumstance, this accidental mention of the child as mine, quite touched my
heart and brought the foolish tears into my eyes.
When Little Frank is sent to school in the country, I shall be very much at a
loss what to do with myself, but I have the intention of walking down there
once a month and seeing him on a half holiday. I am told he will then be at
play upon the Heath; and if my visits should be objected to, as unsettling the

child, I can see him from a distance without his seeing me, and walk back
again. His mother comes of a highly genteel family, and rather disapproves, I
am aware, of our being too much together. I know that I am not calculated to
improve his retiring disposition; but I think he would miss me beyond the
feeling of the moment if we were wholly separated.
When I die in the Clapham Road, I shall not leave much more in this world
than I shall take out of it; but, I happen to have a miniature of a bright-faced
boy, with a curling head, and an open shirt-frill waving down his bosom (my
mother had it taken for me, but I can't believe that it was ever like), which will
be worth nothing to sell, and which I shall beg may he given to Frank. I have
written my dear boy a little letter with it, in which I have told him that I felt
very sorry to part from him, though bound to confess that I knew no reason
why I should remain here. I have given him some short advice, the best in my
power, to take warning of the consequences of being nobody's enemy but his
own; and I have endeavoured to comfort him for what I fear he will consider a
bereavement, by pointing out to him, that I was only a superfluous something
to every one but him; and that having by some means failed to find a place in
this great assembly, I am better out of it.
Such (said the poor relation, clearing his throat and beginning to speak a
little louder) is the general impression about me. Now, it is a remarkable
circumstance which forms the aim and purpose of my story, that this is all
wrong. This is not my life, and these are not my habits. I do not even live in
the Clapham Road. Comparatively speaking, I am very seldom there. I reside,
mostly, in a--I am almost ashamed to say the word, it sounds so full of
pretension--in a Castle. I do not mean that it is an old baronial habitation, but
still it is a building always known to every one by the name of a Castle. In it, I
preserve the particulars of my history; they run thus:
It was when I first took John Spatter (who had been my clerk) into
partnership, and when I was still a young man of not more than five- andtwenty, residing in the house of my uncle Chill, from whom I had considerable
expectations, that I ventured to propose to Christiana. I had loved Christiana a
long time. She was very beautiful, and very winning in all respects. I rather
mistrusted her widowed mother, who I feared was of a plotting and mercenary
turn of mind; but, I thought as well of her as I could, for Christiana's sake. I
never had loved any one but Christiana, and she had been all the world, and O
far more than all the world, to me, from our childhood!
Christiana accepted me with her mother's consent, and I was rendered very
happy indeed. My life at my uncle Chill's was of a spare dull kind, and my
garret chamber was as dull, and bare, and cold, as an upper prison room in
some stern northern fortress. But, having Christiana's love, I wanted nothing
upon earth. I would not have changed my lot with any human being.

Avarice was, unhappily, my uncle Chill's master-vice. Though he was rich,
he pinched, and scraped, and clutched, and lived miserably. As Christiana had
no fortune, I was for some time a little fearful of confessing our engagement to
him; but, at length I wrote him a letter, saying how it all truly was. I put it into
his hand one night, on going to bed.
As I came down-stairs next morning, shivering in the cold December air;
colder in my uncle's unwarmed house than in the street, where the winter sun
did sometimes shine, and which was at all events enlivened by cheerful faces
and voices passing along; I carried a heavy heart towards the long, low
breakfast-room in which my uncle sat. It was a large room with a small fire,
and there was a great bay window in it which the rain had marked in the night
as if with the tears of houseless people. It stared upon a raw yard, with a
cracked stone pavement, and some rusted iron railings half uprooted, whence
an ugly out-building that had once been a dissecting-room (in the time of the
great surgeon who had mortgaged the house to my uncle), stared at it.
We rose so early always, that at that time of the year we breakfasted by
candle-light. When I went into the room, my uncle was so contracted by the
cold, and so huddled together in his chair behind the one dim candle, that I did
not see him until I was close to the table.
As I held out my hand to him, he caught up his stick (being infirm, he
always walked about the house with a stick), and made a blow at me, and said,
"You fool!"
"Uncle," I returned, "I didn't expect you to be so angry as this." Nor had I
expected it, though he was a hard and angry old man.
"You didn't expect!" said he; "when did you ever expect? When did you
ever calculate, or look forward, you contemptible dog?"
"These are hard words, uncle!"
"Hard words? Feathers, to pelt such an idiot as you with," said he. "Here!
Betsy Snap! Look at him!"
Betsy Snap was a withered, hard-favoured, yellow old woman--our only
domestic--always employed, at this time of the morning, in rubbing my uncle's
legs. As my uncle adjured her to look at me, he put his lean grip on the crown
of her head, she kneeling beside him, and turned her face towards me. An
involuntary thought connecting them both with the Dissecting Room, as it
must often have been in the surgeon's time, passed across my mind in the
midst of my anxiety.
"Look at the snivelling milksop!" said my uncle. "Look at the baby! This is
the gentleman who, people say, is nobody's enemy but his own. This is the

gentleman who can't say no. This is the gentleman who was making such large
profits in his business that he must needs take a partner, t'other day. This is the
gentleman who is going to marry a wife without a penny, and who falls into
the hands of Jezabels who are speculating on my death!"
I knew, now, how great my uncle's rage was; for nothing short of his being
almost beside himself would have induced him to utter that concluding word,
which he held in such repugnance that it was never spoken or hinted at before
him on any account.
"On my death," he repeated, as if he were defying me by defying his own
abhorrence of the word. "On my death--death--Death! But I'll spoil the
speculation. Eat your last under this roof, you feeble wretch, and may it choke
you!"
You may suppose that I had not much appetite for the breakfast to which I
was bidden in these terms; but, I took my accustomed seat. I saw that I was
repudiated henceforth by my uncle; still I could bear that very well, possessing
Christiana's heart.
He emptied his basin of bread and milk as usual, only that he took it on his
knees with his chair turned away from the table where I sat. When he had
done, he carefully snuffed out the candle; and the cold, slate-coloured,
miserable day looked in upon us.
"Now, Mr. Michael," said he, "before we part, I should like to have a word
with these ladies in your presence."
"As you will, sir," I returned; "but you deceive yourself, and wrong us,
cruelly, if you suppose that there is any feeling at stake in this contract but
pure, disinterested, faithful love."
To this, he only replied, "You lie!" and not one other word.
We went, through half-thawed snow and half-frozen rain, to the house
where Christiana and her mother lived. My uncle knew them very well. They
were sitting at their breakfast, and were surprised to see us at that hour.
"Your servant, ma'am," said my uncle to the mother. "You divine the
purpose of my visit, I dare say, ma'am. I understand there is a world of pure,
disinterested, faithful love cooped up here. I am happy to bring it all it wants,
to make it complete. I bring you your son-in-law, ma'am--and you, your
husband, miss. The gentleman is a perfect stranger to me, but I wish him joy
of his wise bargain."
He snarled at me as he went out, and I never saw him again.
It is altogether a mistake (continued the poor relation) to suppose that my
dear Christiana, over-persuaded and influenced by her mother, married a rich

man, the dirt from whose carriage wheels is often, in these changed times,
thrown upon me as she rides by. No, no. She married me.
The way we came to be married rather sooner than we intended, was this. I
took a frugal lodging and was saving and planning for her sake, when, one
day, she spoke to me with great earnestness, and said:
"My dear Michael, I have given you my heart. I have said that I loved you,
and I have pledged myself to be your wife. I am as much yours through all
changes of good and evil as if we had been married on the day when such
words passed between us. I know you well, and know that if we should be
separated and our union broken off, your whole life would be shadowed, and
all that might, even now, be stronger in your character for the conflict with the
world would then be weakened to the shadow of what it is!"
"God help me, Christiana!" said I. "You speak the truth."
"Michael!" said she, putting her hand in mine, in all maidenly devotion,
"let us keep apart no longer. It is but for me to say that I can live contented
upon such means as you have, and I well know you are happy. I say so from
my heart. Strive no more alone; let us strive together. My dear Michael, it is
not right that I should keep secret from you what you do not suspect, but what
distresses my whole life. My mother: without considering that what you have
lost, you have lost for me, and on the assurance of my faith: sets her heart on
riches, and urges another suit upon me, to my misery. I cannot bear this, for to
bear it is to be untrue to you. I would rather share your struggles than look on.
I want no better home than you can give me. I know that you will aspire and
labour with a higher courage if I am wholly yours, and let it be so when you
will!"
I was blest indeed, that day, and a new world opened to me. We were
married in a very little while, and I took my wife to our happy home. That was
the beginning of the residence I have spoken of; the Castle we have ever since
inhabited together, dates from that time. All our children have been born in it.
Our first child--now married--was a little girl, whom we called Christiana. Her
son is so like Little Frank, that I hardly know which is which.
The current impression as to my partner's dealings with me is also quite
erroneous. He did not begin to treat me coldly, as a poor simpleton, when my
uncle and I so fatally quarrelled; nor did he afterwards gradually possess
himself of our business and edge me out. On the contrary, he behaved to me
with the utmost good faith and honour.
Matters between us took this turn:- On the day of my separation from my
uncle, and even before the arrival at our counting-house of my trunks (which
he sent after me, NOT carriage paid), I went down to our room of business, on

our little wharf, overlooking the river; and there I told John Spatter what had
happened. John did not say, in reply, that rich old relatives were palpable facts,
and that love and sentiment were moonshine and fiction. He addressed me
thus:
"Michael," said John, "we were at school together, and I generally had the
knack of getting on better than you, and making a higher reputation."
"You had, John," I returned.
"Although" said John, "I borrowed your books and lost them; borrowed
your pocket-money, and never repaid it; got you to buy my damaged knives at
a higher price than I had given for them new; and to own to the windows that I
had broken."
"All not worth mentioning, John Spatter," said I, "but certainly true."
"When you were first established in this infant business, which promises to
thrive so well," pursued John, "I came to you, in my search for almost any
employment, and you made me your clerk."
"Still not worth mentioning, my dear John Spatter," said I; "still, equally
true."
"And finding that I had a good head for business, and that I was really
useful TO the business, you did not like to retain me in that capacity, and
thought it an act of justice soon to make me your partner."
"Still less worth mentioning than any of those other little circumstances
you have recalled, John Spatter," said I; "for I was, and am, sensible of your
merits and my deficiencies."
"Now, my good friend," said John, drawing my arm through his, as he had
had a habit of doing at school; while two vessels outside the windows of our
counting-house--which were shaped like the stern windows of a ship--went
lightly down the river with the tide, as John and I might then be sailing away
in company, and in trust and confidence, on our voyage of life; "let there,
under these friendly circumstances, be a right understanding between us. You
are too easy, Michael. You are nobody's enemy but your own. If I were to give
you that damaging character among our connexion, with a shrug, and a shake
of the head, and a sigh; and if I were further to abuse the trust you place in me-"
"But you never will abuse it at all, John," I observed.
"Never!" said he; "but I am putting a case--I say, and if I were further to
abuse that trust by keeping this piece of our common affairs in the dark, and
this other piece in the light, and again this other piece in the twilight, and so
on, I should strengthen my strength, and weaken your weakness, day by day,

until at last I found myself on the high road to fortune, and you left behind on
some bare common, a hopeless number of miles out of the way."
"Exactly so," said I.
"To prevent this, Michael," said John Spatter, "or the remotest chance of
this, there must be perfect openness between us. Nothing must be concealed,
and we must have but one interest."
"My dear John Spatter," I assured him, "that is precisely what I mean."
"And when you are too easy," pursued John, his face glowing with
friendship, "you must allow me to prevent that imperfection in your nature
from being taken advantage of, by any one; you must not expect me to humour
it--"
"My dear John Spatter," I interrupted, "I DON'T expect you to humour it. I
want to correct it."
"And I, too," said John.
"Exactly so!" cried I. "We both have the same end in view; and,
honourably seeking it, and fully trusting one another, and having but one
interest, ours will be a prosperous and happy partnership."
"I am sure of it!" returned John Spatter. And we shook hands most
affectionately.
I took John home to my Castle, and we had a very happy day. Our
partnership throve well. My friend and partner supplied what I wanted, as I
had foreseen that he would, and by improving both the business and myself,
amply acknowledged any little rise in life to which I had helped him.
I am not (said the poor relation, looking at the fire as he slowly rubbed his
hands) very rich, for I never cared to be that; but I have enough, and am above
all moderate wants and anxieties. My Castle is not a splendid place, but it is
very comfortable, and it has a warm and cheerful air, and is quite a picture of
Home.
Our eldest girl, who is very like her mother, married John Spatter's eldest
son. Our two families are closely united in other ties of attachment. It is very
pleasant of an evening, when we are all assembled together--which frequently
happens--and when John and I talk over old times, and the one interest there
has always been between us.
I really do not know, in my Castle, what loneliness is. Some of our children
or grandchildren are always about it, and the young voices of my descendants
are delightful--O, how delightful!--to me to hear. My dearest and most devoted
wife, ever faithful, ever loving, ever helpful and sustaining and consoling, is

the priceless blessing of my house; from whom all its other blessings spring.
We are rather a musical family, and when Christiana sees me, at any time, a
little weary or depressed, she steals to the piano and sings a gentle air she used
to sing when we were first betrothed. So weak a man am I, that I cannot bear
to hear it from any other source. They played it once, at the Theatre, when I
was there with Little Frank; and the child said wondering, "Cousin Michael,
whose hot tears are these that have fallen on my hand!"
Such is my Castle, and such are the real particulars of my life therein
preserved. I often take Little Frank home there. He is very welcome to my
grandchildren, and they play together. At this time of the year--the Christmas
and New Year time--I am seldom out of my Castle. For, the associations of the
season seem to hold me there, and the precepts of the season seem to teach me
that it is well to be there.
"And the Castle is--" observed a grave, kind voice among the company.
"Yes. My Castle," said the poor relation, shaking his head as he still looked
at the fire, "is in the Air. John our esteemed host suggests its situation
accurately. My Castle is in the Air! I have done. Will you be so good as to pass
the story?"

The Child's Story
Once upon a time, a good many years ago, there was a traveller, and he set
out upon a journey. It was a magic journey, and was to seem very long when
he began it, and very short when he got half way through.
He travelled along a rather dark path for some little time, without meeting
anything, until at last he came to a beautiful child. So he said to the child,
"What do you do here?" And the child said, "I am always at play. Come and
play with me!"
So, he played with that child, the whole day long, and they were very
merry. The sky was so blue, the sun was so bright, the water was so sparkling,
the leaves were so green, the flowers were so lovely, and they heard such
singing-birds and saw so many butteries, that everything was beautiful. This
was in fine weather. When it rained, they loved to watch the falling drops, and
to smell the fresh scents. When it blew, it was delightful to listen to the wind,
and fancy what it said, as it came rushing from its home-- where was that, they
wondered!--whistling and howling, driving the clouds before it, bending the
trees, rumbling in the chimneys, shaking the house, and making the sea roar in
fury. But, when it snowed, that was best of all; for, they liked nothing so well

as to look up at the white flakes falling fast and thick, like down from the
breasts of millions of white birds; and to see how smooth and deep the drift
was; and to listen to the hush upon the paths and roads.
They had plenty of the finest toys in the world, and the most astonishing
picture-books: all about scimitars and slippers and turbans, and dwarfs and
giants and genii and fairies, and blue- beards and bean-stalks and riches and
caverns and forests and Valentines and Orsons: and all new and all true.
But, one day, of a sudden, the traveller lost the child. He called to him over
and over again, but got no answer. So, he went upon his road, and went on for
a little while without meeting anything, until at last he came to a handsome
boy. So, he said to the boy, "What do you do here?" And the boy said, "I am
always learning. Come and learn with me."
So he learned with that boy about Jupiter and Juno, and the Greeks and the
Romans, and I don't know what, and learned more than I could tell--or he
either, for he soon forgot a great deal of it. But, they were not always learning;
they had the merriest games that ever were played. They rowed upon the river
in summer, and skated on the ice in winter; they were active afoot, and active
on horseback; at cricket, and all games at ball; at prisoner's base, hare and
hounds, follow my leader, and more sports than I can think of; nobody could
beat them. They had holidays too, and Twelfth cakes, and parties where they
danced till midnight, and real Theatres where they saw palaces of real gold
and silver rise out of the real earth, and saw all the wonders of the world at
once. As to friends, they had such dear friends and so many of them, that I
want the time to reckon them up. They were all young, like the handsome boy,
and were never to be strange to one another all their lives through.
Still, one day, in the midst of all these pleasures, the traveller lost the boy
as he had lost the child, and, after calling to him in vain, went on upon his
journey. So he went on for a little while without seeing anything, until at last
he came to a young man. So, he said to the young man, "What do you do
here?" And the young man said, "I am always in love. Come and love with
me."
So, he went away with that young man, and presently they came to one of
the prettiest girls that ever was seen--just like Fanny in the corner there--and
she had eyes like Fanny, and hair like Fanny, and dimples like Fanny's, and
she laughed and coloured just as Fanny does while I am talking about her. So,
the young man fell in love directly--just as Somebody I won't mention, the
first time he came here, did with Fanny. Well! he was teased sometimes--just
as Somebody used to be by Fanny; and they quarrelled sometimes--just as
Somebody and Fanny used to quarrel; and they made it up, and sat in the dark,
and wrote letters every day, and never were happy asunder, and were always

looking out for one another and pretending not to, and were engaged at
Christmas-time, and sat close to one another by the fire, and were going to be
married very soon--all exactly like Somebody I won't mention, and Fanny!
But, the traveller lost them one day, as he had lost the rest of his friends,
and, after calling to them to come back, which they never did, went on upon
his journey. So, he went on for a little while without seeing anything, until at
last he came to a middle-aged gentleman. So, he said to the gentleman, "What
are you doing here?" And his answer was, "I am always busy. Come and be
busy with me!"
So, he began to be very busy with that gentleman, and they went on
through the wood together. The whole journey was through a wood, only it
had been open and green at first, like a wood in spring; and now began to be
thick and dark, like a wood in summer; some of the little trees that had come
out earliest, were even turning brown. The gentleman was not alone, but had a
lady of about the same age with him, who was his Wife; and they had children,
who were with them too. So, they all went on together through the wood,
cutting down the trees, and making a path through the branches and the fallen
leaves, and carrying burdens, and working hard.
Sometimes, they came to a long green avenue that opened into deeper
woods. Then they would hear a very little, distant voice crying, "Father, father,
I am another child! Stop for me!" And presently they would see a very little
figure, growing larger as it came along, running to join them. When it came
up, they all crowded round it, and kissed and welcomed it; and then they all
went on together.
Sometimes, they came to several avenues at once, and then they all stood
still, and one of the children said, "Father, I am going to sea," and another said,
"Father, I am going to India," and another, "Father, I am going to seek my
fortune where I can," and another, "Father, I am going to Heaven!" So, with
many tears at parting, they went, solitary, down those avenues, each child
upon its way; and the child who went to Heaven, rose into the golden air and
vanished.
Whenever these partings happened, the traveller looked at the gentleman,
and saw him glance up at the sky above the trees, where the day was
beginning to decline, and the sunset to come on. He saw, too, that his hair was
turning grey. But, they never could rest long, for they had their journey to
perform, and it was necessary for them to be always busy.
At last, there had been so many partings that there were no children left,
and only the traveller, the gentleman, and the lady, went upon their way in
company. And now the wood was yellow; and now brown; and the leaves,
even of the forest trees, began to fall.

So, they came to an avenue that was darker than the rest, and were pressing
forward on their journey without looking down it when the lady stopped.
"My husband," said the lady. "I am called."
They listened, and they heard a voice a long way down the avenue, say,
"Mother, mother!"
It was the voice of the first child who had said, "I am going to Heaven!"
and the father said, "I pray not yet. The sunset is very near. I pray not yet!"
But, the voice cried, "Mother, mother!" without minding him, though his
hair was now quite white, and tears were on his face.
Then, the mother, who was already drawn into the shade of the dark
avenue and moving away with her arms still round his neck, kissed him, and
said, "My dearest, I am summoned, and I go!" And she was gone. And the
traveller and he were left alone together.
And they went on and on together, until they came to very near the end of
the wood: so near, that they could see the sunset shining red before them
through the trees.
Yet, once more, while he broke his way among the branches, the traveller
lost his friend. He called and called, but there was no reply, and when he
passed out of the wood, and saw the peaceful sun going down upon a wide
purple prospect, he came to an old man sitting on a fallen tree. So, he said to
the old man, "What do you do here?" And the old man said with a calm smile,
"I am always remembering. Come and remember with me!"
So the traveller sat down by the side of that old man, face to face with the
serene sunset; and all his friends came softly back and stood around him. The
beautiful child, the handsome boy, the young man in love, the father, mother,
and children: every one of them was there, and he had lost nothing. So, he
loved them all, and was kind and forbearing with them all, and was always
pleased to watch them all, and they all honoured and loved him. And I think
the traveller must be yourself, dear Grandfather, because this what you do to
us, and what we do to you.

The Schoolboy's Story
Being rather young at present--I am getting on in years, but still I am rather
young--I have no particular adventures of my own to fall back upon. It
wouldn't much interest anybody here, I suppose, to know what a screw the
Reverend is, or what a griffin SHE is, or how they do stick it into parents--

particularly hair-cutting, and medical attendance. One of our fellows was
charged in his half's account twelve and sixpence for two pills--tolerably
profitable at six and threepence a-piece, I should think--and he never took
them either, but put them up the sleeve of his jacket.
As to the beef, it's shameful. It's NOT beef. Regular beef isn't veins. You
can chew regular beef. Besides which, there's gravy to regular beef, and you
never see a drop to ours. Another of our fellows went home ill, and heard the
family doctor tell his father that he couldn't account for his complaint unless it
was the beer. Of course it was the beer, and well it might be!
However, beef and Old Cheeseman are two different things. So is beer. It
was Old Cheeseman I meant to tell about; not the manner in which our fellows
get their constitutions destroyed for the sake of profit.
Why, look at the pie-crust alone. There's no flakiness in it. It's solid--like
damp lead. Then our fellows get nightmares, and are bolstered for calling out
and waking other fellows. Who can wonder!
Old Cheeseman one night walked in his sleep, put his hat on over his
night-cap, got hold of a fishing-rod and a cricket-bat, and went down into the
parlour, where they naturally thought from his appearance he was a Ghost.
Why, he never would have done that if his meals had been wholesome. When
we all begin to walk in our sleeps, I suppose they'll be sorry for it.
Old Cheeseman wasn't second Latin Master then; he was a fellow himself.
He was first brought there, very small, in a post-chaise, by a woman who was
always taking snuff and shaking him--and that was the most he remembered
about it. He never went home for the holidays. His accounts (he never learnt
any extras) were sent to a Bank, and the Bank paid them; and he had a brown
suit twice a-year, and went into boots at twelve. They were always too big for
him, too.
In the Midsummer holidays, some of our fellows who lived within walking
distance, used to come back and climb the trees outside the playground wall,
on purpose to look at Old Cheeseman reading there by himself. He was always
as mild as the tea--and THAT'S pretty mild, I should hope!--so when they
whistled to him, he looked up and nodded; and when they said, "Halloa, Old
Cheeseman, what have you had for dinner?" he said, "Boiled mutton;" and
when they said, "An't it solitary, Old Cheeseman?" he said, "It is a little dull
sometimes:" and then they said, "Well good-bye, Old Cheeseman!" and
climbed down again. Of course it was imposing on Old Cheeseman to give
him nothing but boiled mutton through a whole Vacation, but that was just like
the system. When they didn't give him boiled mutton, they gave him rice
pudding, pretending it was a treat. And saved the butcher.

So Old Cheeseman went on. The holidays brought him into other trouble
besides the loneliness; because when the fellows began to come back, not
wanting to, he was always glad to see them; which was aggravating when they
were not at all glad to see him, and so he got his head knocked against walls,
and that was the way his nose bled. But he was a favourite in general. Once a
subscription was raised for him; and, to keep up his spirits, he was presented
before the holidays with two white mice, a rabbit, a pigeon, and a beautiful
puppy. Old Cheeseman cried about it--especially soon afterwards, when they
all ate one another.
Of course Old Cheeseman used to be called by the names of all sorts of
cheeses--Double Glo'sterman, Family Cheshireman, Dutchman, North
Wiltshireman, and all that. But he never minded it. And I don't mean to say he
was old in point of years--because he wasn't--only he was called from the first,
Old Cheeseman.
At last, Old Cheeseman was made second Latin Master. He was brought in
one morning at the beginning of a new half, and presented to the school in that
capacity as "Mr. Cheeseman." Then our fellows all agreed that Old Cheeseman
was a spy, and a deserter, who had gone over to the enemy's camp, and sold
himself for gold. It was no excuse for him that he had sold himself for very
little gold--two pound ten a quarter and his washing, as was reported. It was
decided by a Parliament which sat about it, that Old Cheeseman's mercenary
motives could alone be taken into account, and that he had "coined our blood
for drachmas." The Parliament took the expression out of the quarrel scene
between Brutus and Cassius.
When it was settled in this strong way that Old Cheeseman was a
tremendous traitor, who had wormed himself into our fellows' secrets on
purpose to get himself into favour by giving up everything he knew, all
courageous fellows were invited to come forward and enrol themselves in a
Society for making a set against him. The President of the Society was First
boy, named Bob Tarter. His father was in the West Indies, and he owned,
himself, that his father was worth Millions. He had great power among our
fellows, and he wrote a parody, beginning "Who made believe to be so meek
That we could hardly hear him speak,
Yet turned out an Informing Sneak?
Old Cheeseman."
- and on in that way through more than a dozen verses, which he used to go
and sing, every morning, close by the new master's desk. He trained one of the
low boys, too, a rosy-cheeked little Brass who didn't care what he did, to go up

to him with his Latin Grammar one morning, and say it so: NOMINATIVUS
PRONOMINUM--Old Cheeseman, RARO EXPRIMITUR--was never
suspected, NISI DISTINCTIONIS--of being an informer, AUT EMPHASIS
GRATiA--until he proved one. UT--for instance, VOS DAMNASTIS--when
he sold the boys. QUASI--as though, DICAT--he should say, PRETAEREA
NEMO--I'm a Judas! All this produced a great effect on Old Cheeseman. He
had never had much hair; but what he had, began to get thinner and thinner
every day. He grew paler and more worn; and sometimes of an evening he was
seen sitting at his desk with a precious long snuff to his candle, and his hands
before his face, crying. But no member of the Society could pity him, even if
he felt inclined, because the President said it was Old Cheeseman's
conscience.
So Old Cheeseman went on, and didn't he lead a miserable life! Of course
the Reverend turned up his nose at him, and of course SHE did--because both
of them always do that at all the masters--but he suffered from the fellows
most, and he suffered from them constantly. He never told about it, that the
Society could find out; but he got no credit for that, because the President said
it was Old Cheeseman's cowardice.
He had only one friend in the world, and that one was almost as powerless
as he was, for it was only Jane. Jane was a sort of wardrobe woman to our
fellows, and took care of the boxes. She had come at first, I believe, as a kind
of apprentice--some of our fellows say from a Charity, but I don't know--and
after her time was out, had stopped at so much a year. So little a year, perhaps
I ought to say, for it is far more likely. However, she had put some pounds in
the Savings' Bank, and she was a very nice young woman. She was not quite
pretty; but she had a very frank, honest, bright face, and all our fellows were
fond of her. She was uncommonly neat and cheerful, and uncommonly
comfortable and kind. And if anything was the matter with a fellow's mother,
he always went and showed the letter to Jane.
Jane was Old Cheeseman's friend. The more the Society went against him,
the more Jane stood by him. She used to give him a good- humoured look out
of her still-room window, sometimes, that seemed to set him up for the day.
She used to pass out of the orchard and the kitchen garden (always kept
locked, I believe you!) through the playground, when she might have gone the
other way, only to give a turn of her head, as much as to say "Keep up your
spirits!" to Old Cheeseman. His slip of a room was so fresh and orderly that it
was well known who looked after it while he was at his desk; and when our
fellows saw a smoking hot dumpling on his plate at dinner, they knew with
indignation who had sent it up.
Under these circumstances, the Society resolved, after a quantity of
meeting and debating, that Jane should be requested to cut Old Cheeseman

dead; and that if she refused, she must be sent to Coventry herself. So a
deputation, headed by the President, was appointed to wait on Jane, and
inform her of the vote the Society had been under the painful necessity of
passing. She was very much respected for all her good qualities, and there was
a story about her having once waylaid the Reverend in his own study, and got
a fellow off from severe punishment, of her own kind comfortable heart. So
the deputation didn't much like the job. However, they went up, and the
President told Jane all about it. Upon which Jane turned very red, burst into
tears, informed the President and the deputation, in a way not at all like her
usual way, that they were a parcel of malicious young savages, and turned the
whole respected body out of the room. Consequently it was entered in the
Society's book (kept in astronomical cypher for fear of detection), that all
communication with Jane was interdicted: and the President addressed the
members on this convincing instance of Old Cheeseman's undermining.
But Jane was as true to Old Cheeseman as Old Cheeseman was false to our
fellows--in their opinion, at all events--and steadily continued to be his only
friend. It was a great exasperation to the Society, because Jane was as much a
loss to them as she was a gain to him; and being more inveterate against him
than ever, they treated him worse than ever. At last, one morning, his desk
stood empty, his room was peeped into, and found to be vacant, and a whisper
went about among the pale faces of our fellows that Old Cheeseman, unable to
bear it any longer, had got up early and drowned himself.
The mysterious looks of the other masters after breakfast, and the evident
fact that old Cheeseman was not expected, confirmed the Society in this
opinion. Some began to discuss whether the President was liable to hanging or
only transportation for life, and the President's face showed a great anxiety to
know which. However, he said that a jury of his country should find him
game; and that in his address he should put it to them to lay their hands upon
their hearts and say whether they as Britons approved of informers, and how
they thought they would like it themselves. Some of the Society considered
that he had better run away until he found a forest where he might change
clothes with a wood-cutter, and stain his face with blackberries; but the
majority believed that if he stood his ground, his father--belonging as he did to
the West Indies, and being worth millions--could buy him off.
All our fellows' hearts beat fast when the Reverend came in, and made a
sort of a Roman, or a Field Marshal, of himself with the ruler; as he always did
before delivering an address. But their fears were nothing to their
astonishment when he came out with the story that Old Cheeseman, "so long
our respected friend and fellow- pilgrim in the pleasant plains of knowledge,"
he called him--O yes! I dare say! Much of that!--was the orphan child of a
disinherited young lady who had married against her father's wish, and whose

young husband had died, and who had died of sorrow herself, and whose
unfortunate baby (Old Cheeseman) had been brought up at the cost of a
grandfather who would never consent to see it, baby, boy, or man: which
grandfather was now dead, and serve him right--that's my putting in--and
which grandfather's large property, there being no will, was now, and all of a
sudden and for ever, Old Cheeseman's! Our so long respected friend and
fellow-pilgrim in the pleasant plains of knowledge, the Reverend wound up a
lot of bothering quotations by saying, would "come among us once more" that
day fortnight, when he desired to take leave of us himself, in a more particular
manner. With these words, he stared severely round at our fellows, and went
solemnly out.
There was precious consternation among the members of the Society, now.
Lots of them wanted to resign, and lots more began to try to make out that
they had never belonged to it. However, the President stuck up, and said that
they must stand or fall together, and that if a breach was made it should be
over his body--which was meant to encourage the Society: but it didn't. The
President further said, he would consider the position in which they stood, and
would give them his best opinion and advice in a few days. This was eagerly
looked for, as he knew a good deal of the world on account of his father's
being in the West Indies.
After days and days of hard thinking, and drawing armies all over his slate,
the President called our fellows together, and made the matter clear. He said it
was plain that when Old Cheeseman came on the appointed day, his first
revenge would be to impeach the Society, and have it flogged all round. After
witnessing with joy the torture of his enemies, and gloating over the cries
which agony would extort from them, the probability was that he would invite
the Reverend, on pretence of conversation, into a private room--say the
parlour into which Parents were shown, where the two great globes were
which were never used--and would there reproach him with the various frauds
and oppressions he had endured at his hands. At the close of his observations
he would make a signal to a Prizefighter concealed in the passage, who would
then appear and pitch into the Reverend, till he was left insensible. Old
Cheeseman would then make Jane a present of from five to ten pounds, and
would leave the establishment in fiendish triumph.
The President explained that against the parlour part, or the Jane part, of
these arrangements he had nothing to say; but, on the part of the Society, he
counselled deadly resistance. With this view he recommended that all
available desks should be filled with stones, and that the first word of the
complaint should be the signal to every fellow to let fly at Old Cheeseman.
The bold advice put the Society in better spirits, and was unanimously taken.
A post about Old Cheeseman's size was put up in the playground, and all our

fellows practised at it till it was dinted all over.
When the day came, and Places were called, every fellow sat down in a
tremble. There had been much discussing and disputing as to how Old
Cheeseman would come; but it was the general opinion that he would appear
in a sort of triumphal car drawn by four horses, with two livery servants in
front, and the Prizefighter in disguise up behind. So, all our fellows sat
listening for the sound of wheels. But no wheels were heard, for Old
Cheeseman walked after all, and came into the school without any preparation.
Pretty much as he used to be, only dressed in black.
"Gentlemen," said the Reverend, presenting him, "our so long respected
friend and fellow-pilgrim in the pleasant plains of knowledge, is desirous to
offer a word or two. Attention, gentlemen, one and all!"
Every fellow stole his hand into his desk and looked at the President. The
President was all ready, and taking aim at old Cheeseman with his eyes.
What did Old Cheeseman then, but walk up to his old desk, look round
him with a queer smile as if there was a tear in his eye, and begin in a
quavering, mild voice, "My dear companions and old friends!"
Every fellow's hand came out of his desk, and the President suddenly
began to cry.
"My dear companions and old friends," said Old Cheeseman, "you have
heard of my good fortune. I have passed so many years under this roof--my
entire life so far, I may say--that I hope you have been glad to hear of it for my
sake. I could never enjoy it without exchanging congratulations with you. If
we have ever misunderstood one another at all, pray, my dear boys, let us
forgive and forget. I have a great tenderness for you, and I am sure you return
it. I want in the fulness of a grateful heart to shake hands with you every one. I
have come back to do it, if you please, my dear boys."
Since the President had begun to cry, several other fellows had broken out
here and there: but now, when Old Cheeseman began with him as first boy,
laid his left hand affectionately on his shoulder and gave him his right; and
when the President said "Indeed, I don't deserve it, sir; upon my honour I
don't;" there was sobbing and crying all over the school. Every other fellow
said he didn't deserve it, much in the same way; but Old Cheeseman, not
minding that a bit, went cheerfully round to every boy, and wound up with
every master--finishing off the Reverend last.
Then a snivelling little chap in a corner, who was always under some
punishment or other, set up a shrill cry of "Success to Old Cheeseman!
Hooray!" The Reverend glared upon him, and said, "MR. Cheeseman, sir."
But, Old Cheeseman protesting that he liked his old name a great deal better

than his new one, all our fellows took up the cry; and, for I don't know how
many minutes, there was such a thundering of feet and hands, and such a
roaring of Old Cheeseman, as never was heard.
After that, there was a spread in the dining-room of the most magnificent
kind. Fowls, tongues, preserves, fruits, confectionaries, jellies, neguses,
barley-sugar temples, trifles, crackers--eat all you can and pocket what you
like--all at Old Cheeseman's expense. After that, speeches, whole holiday,
double and treble sets of all manners of things for all manners of games,
donkeys, pony-chaises and drive yourself, dinner for all the masters at the
Seven Bells (twenty pounds a-head our fellows estimated it at), an annual
holiday and feast fixed for that day every year, and another on Old
Cheeseman's birthday--Reverend bound down before the fellows to allow it,
so that he could never back out--all at Old Cheeseman's expense.
And didn't our fellows go down in a body and cheer outside the Seven
Bells? O no!
But there's something else besides. Don't look at the next story- teller, for
there's more yet. Next day, it was resolved that the Society should make it up
with Jane, and then be dissolved. What do you think of Jane being gone,
though! "What? Gone for ever?" said our fellows, with long faces. "Yes, to be
sure," was all the answer they could get. None of the people about the house
would say anything more. At length, the first boy took upon himself to ask the
Reverend whether our old friend Jane was really gone? The Reverend (he has
got a daughter at home--turn-up nose, and red) replied severely, "Yes, sir, Miss
Pitt is gone." The idea of calling Jane, Miss Pitt! Some said she had been sent
away in disgrace for taking money from Old Cheeseman; others said she had
gone into Old Cheeseman's service at a rise of ten pounds a year. All that our
fellows knew, was, she was gone.
It was two or three months afterwards, when, one afternoon, an open
carriage stopped at the cricket field, just outside bounds, with a lady and
gentleman in it, who looked at the game a long time and stood up to see it
played. Nobody thought much about them, until the same little snivelling chap
came in, against all rules, from the post where he was Scout, and said, "It's
Jane!" Both Elevens forgot the game directly, and ran crowding round the
carriage. It WAS Jane! In such a bonnet! And if you'll believe me, Jane was
married to Old Cheeseman.
It soon became quite a regular thing when our fellows were hard at it in the
playground, to see a carriage at the low part of the wall where it joins the high
part, and a lady and gentleman standing up in it, looking over. The gentleman
was always Old Cheeseman, and the lady was always Jane.
The first time I ever saw them, I saw them in that way. There had been a

good many changes among our fellows then, and it had turned out that Bob
Tarter's father wasn't worth Millions! He wasn't worth anything. Bob had gone
for a soldier, and Old Cheeseman had purchased his discharge. But that's not
the carriage. The carriage stopped, and all our fellows stopped as soon as it
was seen.
"So you have never sent me to Coventry after all!" said the lady, laughing,
as our fellows swarmed up the wall to shake hands with her. "Are you never
going to do it?"
"Never! never! never!" on all sides.
I didn't understand what she meant then, but of course I do now. I was very
much pleased with her face though, and with her good way, and I couldn't help
looking at her--and at him too--with all our fellows clustering so joyfully
about them.
They soon took notice of me as a new boy, so I thought I might as well
swarm up the wall myself, and shake hands with them as the rest did. I was
quite as glad to see them as the rest were, and was quite as familiar with them
in a moment.
"Only a fortnight now," said Old Cheeseman, "to the holidays. Who stops?
Anybody?"
A good many fingers pointed at me, and a good many voices cried "He
does!" For it was the year when you were all away; and rather low I was about
it, I can tell you.
"Oh!" said Old Cheeseman. "But it's solitary here in the holiday time. He
had better come to us."
So I went to their delightful house, and was as happy as I could possibly
be. They understand how to conduct themselves towards boys, THEY do.
When they take a boy to the play, for instance, they DO take him. They don't
go in after it's begun, or come out before it's over. They know how to bring a
boy up, too. Look at their own! Though he is very little as yet, what a capital
boy he is! Why, my next favourite to Mrs. Cheeseman and Old Cheeseman, is
young Cheeseman.
So, now I have told you all I know about Old Cheeseman. And it's not
much after all, I am afraid. Is it?


