The Gift of the Magi

One dollar and eighty-seven cents. That was all. And sixty cents of it was
in pennies. Pennies saved one and two at a time by bulldozing the grocer and
the vegetable man and the butcher until one’s cheeks burned with the silent
imputation of parsimony that such close dealing implied. Three times Della
counted it. One dollar and eighty-seven cents. And the next day would be
Christmas.
There was clearly nothing to do but flop down on the shabby little couch
and howl. So Della did it. Which instigates the moral reflection that life is
made up of sobs, sniffles, and smiles, with sniffles predominating.
While the mistress of the home is gradually subsiding from the first stage
to the second, take a look at the home. A furnished flat at $8 per week. It did
not exactly beggar description, but it certainly had that word on the lookout for
the mendicancy squad.
In the vestibule below was a letter-box into which no letter would go, and
an electric button from which no mortal finger could coax a ring. Also
appertaining thereunto was a card bearing the name “Mr. James Dillingham
Young.”
The “Dillingham” had been flung to the breeze during a former period of
prosperity when its possessor was being paid $30 per week. Now, when the
income was shrunk to $20, though, they were thinking seriously of contracting
to a modest and unassuming D. But whenever Mr. James Dillingham Young
came home and reached his flat above he was called “Jim” and greatly hugged
by Mrs. James Dillingham Young, already introduced to you as Della. Which
is all very good.
Della finished her cry and attended to her cheeks with the powder rag. She
stood by the window and looked out dully at a gray cat walking a gray fence in
a gray backyard. Tomorrow would be Christmas Day, and she had only $1.87
with which to buy Jim a present. She had been saving every penny she could
for months, with this result. Twenty dollars a week doesn’t go far. Expenses
had been greater than she had calculated. They always are. Only $1.87 to buy
a present for Jim. Her Jim. Many a happy hour she had spent planning for
something nice for him. Something fine and rare and sterling—something just
a little bit near to being worthy of the honor of being owned by Jim.
There was a pier glass between the windows of the room. Perhaps you
have seen a pier glass in an $8 flat. A very thin and very agile person may, by
observing his reflection in a rapid sequence of longitudinal strips, obtain a
fairly accurate conception of his looks. Della, being slender, had mastered the
art.

Suddenly she whirled from the window and stood before the glass. Her
eyes were shining brilliantly, but her face had lost its color within twenty
seconds. Rapidly she pulled down her hair and let it fall to its full length.
Now, there were two possessions of the James Dillingham Youngs in
which they both took a mighty pride. One was Jim’s gold watch that had been
his father’s and his grandfather’s. The other was Della’s hair. Had the queen of
Sheba lived in the flat across the airshaft, Della would have let her hair hang
out the window some day to dry just to depreciate Her Majesty’s jewels and
gifts. Had King Solomon been the janitor, with all his treasures piled up in the
basement, Jim would have pulled out his watch every time he passed, just to
see him pluck at his beard from envy.
So now Della’s beautiful hair fell about her rippling and shining like a
cascade of brown waters. It reached below her knee and made itself almost a
garment for her. And then she did it up again nervously and quickly. Once she
faltered for a minute and stood still while a tear or two splashed on the worn
red carpet.
On went her old brown jacket; on went her old brown hat. With a whirl of
skirts and with the brilliant sparkle still in her eyes, she fluttered out the door
and down the stairs to the street.
Where she stopped the sign read: “Mme. Sofronie. Hair Goods of All
Kinds.” One flight up Della ran, and collected herself, panting. Madame, large,
too white, chilly, hardly looked the “Sofronie.”
“Will you buy my hair?” asked Della.
“I buy hair,” said Madame. “Take yer hat off and let’s have a sight at the
looks of it.”
Down rippled the brown cascade.
“Twenty dollars,” said Madame, lifting the mass with a practised hand.
“Give it to me quick,” said Della.
Oh, and the next two hours tripped by on rosy wings. Forget the hashed
metaphor. She was ransacking the stores for Jim’s present.
She found it at last. It surely had been made for Jim and no one else. There
was no other like it in any of the stores, and she had turned all of them inside
out. It was a platinum fob chain simple and chaste in design, properly
proclaiming its value by substance alone and not by meretricious
ornamentation—as all good things should do. It was even worthy of The
Watch. As soon as she saw it she knew that it must be Jim’s. It was like him.
Quietness and value—the description applied to both. Twenty-one dollars they
took from her for it, and she hurried home with the 87 cents. With that chain

on his watch Jim might be properly anxious about the time in any company.
Grand as the watch was, he sometimes looked at it on the sly on account of the
old leather strap that he used in place of a chain.
When Della reached home her intoxication gave way a little to prudence
and reason. She got out her curling irons and lighted the gas and went to work
repairing the ravages made by generosity added to love. Which is always a
tremendous task, dear friends—a mammoth task.
Within forty minutes her head was covered with tiny, close-lying curls that
made her look wonderfully like a truant schoolboy. She looked at her
reflection in the mirror long, carefully, and critically.
“If Jim doesn’t kill me,” she said to herself, “before he takes a second look
at me, he’ll say I look like a Coney Island chorus girl. But what could I do—
oh! what could I do with a dollar and eighty-seven cents?”
At 7 o’clock the coffee was made and the frying-pan was on the back of
the stove hot and ready to cook the chops.
Jim was never late. Della doubled the fob chain in her hand and sat on the
corner of the table near the door that he always entered. Then she heard his
step on the stair away down on the first flight, and she turned white for just a
moment. She had a habit of saying a little silent prayer about the simplest
everyday things, and now she whispered: “Please God, make him think I am
still pretty.”
The door opened and Jim stepped in and closed it. He looked thin and very
serious. Poor fellow, he was only twenty-two—and to be burdened with a
family! He needed a new overcoat and he was without gloves.
Jim stopped inside the door, as immovable as a setter at the scent of quail.
His eyes were fixed upon Della, and there was an expression in them that she
could not read, and it terrified her. It was not anger, nor surprise, nor
disapproval, nor horror, nor any of the sentiments that she had been prepared
for. He simply stared at her fixedly with that peculiar expression on his face.
Della wriggled off the table and went for him.
“Jim, darling,” she cried, “don’t look at me that way. I had my hair cut off
and sold because I couldn’t have lived through Christmas without giving you a
present. It’ll grow out again—you won’t mind, will you? I just had to do it.
My hair grows awfully fast. Say ‘Merry Christmas!’ Jim, and let’s be happy.
You don’t know what a nice—what a beautiful, nice gift I’ve got for you.”
“You’ve cut off your hair?” asked Jim, laboriously, as if he had not arrived
at that patent fact yet even after the hardest mental labor.
“Cut it off and sold it,” said Della. “Don’t you like me just as well,

anyhow? I’m me without my hair, ain’t I?”
Jim looked about the room curiously.
“You say your hair is gone?” he said, with an air almost of idiocy.
“You needn’t look for it,” said Della. “It’s sold, I tell you—sold and gone,
too. It’s Christmas Eve, boy. Be good to me, for it went for you. Maybe the
hairs of my head were numbered,” she went on with sudden serious sweetness,
“but nobody could ever count my love for you. Shall I put the chops on, Jim?”
Out of his trance Jim seemed quickly to wake. He enfolded his Della. For
ten seconds let us regard with discreet scrutiny some inconsequential object in
the other direction. Eight dollars a week or a million a year—what is the
difference? A mathematician or a wit would give you the wrong answer. The
magi brought valuable gifts, but that was not among them. This dark assertion
will be illuminated later on.
Jim drew a package from his overcoat pocket and threw it upon the table.
“Don’t make any mistake, Dell,” he said, “about me. I don’t think there’s
anything in the way of a haircut or a shave or a shampoo that could make me
like my girl any less. But if you’ll unwrap that package you may see why you
had me going a while at first.”
White fingers and nimble tore at the string and paper. And then an ecstatic
scream of joy; and then, alas! a quick feminine change to hysterical tears and
wails, necessitating the immediate employment of all the comforting powers
of the lord of the flat.
For there lay The Combs—the set of combs, side and back, that Della had
worshipped long in a Broadway window. Beautiful combs, pure tortoise shell,
with jewelled rims—just the shade to wear in the beautiful vanished hair. They
were expensive combs, she knew, and her heart had simply craved and
yearned over them without the least hope of possession. And now, they were
hers, but the tresses that should have adorned the coveted adornments were
gone.
But she hugged them to her bosom, and at length she was able to look up
with dim eyes and a smile and say: “My hair grows so fast, Jim!”
And then Della leaped up like a little singed cat and cried, “Oh, oh!”
Jim had not yet seen his beautiful present. She held it out to him eagerly
upon her open palm. The dull precious metal seemed to flash with a reflection
of her bright and ardent spirit.
“Isn’t it a dandy, Jim? I hunted all over town to find it. You’ll have to look
at the time a hundred times a day now. Give me your watch. I want to see how

it looks on it.”
Instead of obeying, Jim tumbled down on the couch and put his hands
under the back of his head and smiled.
“Dell,” said he, “let’s put our Christmas presents away and keep ’em a
while. They’re too nice to use just at present. I sold the watch to get the money
to buy your combs. And now suppose you put the chops on.”
The magi, as you know, were wise men—wonderfully wise men—who
brought gifts to the Babe in the manger. They invented the art of giving
Christmas presents. Being wise, their gifts were no doubt wise ones, possibly
bearing the privilege of exchange in case of duplication. And here I have
lamely related to you the uneventful chronicle of two foolish children in a flat
who most unwisely sacrificed for each other the greatest treasures of their
house. But in a last word to the wise of these days let it be said that of all who
give gifts these two were the wisest. Of all who give and receive gifts, such as
they are wisest. Everywhere they are wisest. They are the magi.



Heart Of The West

HEART OF THE WEST
I
HEARTS AND CROSSES
Baldy Woods reached for the bottle, and got it. Whenever Baldy went for
anything he usually--but this is not Baldy's story. He poured out a third drink
that was larger by a finger than the first and second. Baldy was in
consultation; and the consultee is worthy of his hire.
"I'd be king if I was you," said Baldy, so positively that his holster creaked and
his spurs rattled.
Webb Yeager pushed back his flat-brimmed Stetson, and made further disorder
in his straw-coloured hair. The tonsorial recourse being without avail, he
followed the liquid example of the more resourceful Baldy.
"If a man marries a queen, it oughtn't to make him a two-spot," declared
Webb, epitomising his grievances.
"Sure not," said Baldy, sympathetic, still thirsty, and genuinely solicitous
concerning the relative value of the cards. "By rights you're a king. If I was

you, I'd call for a new deal. The cards have been stacked on you--I'll tell you
what you are, Webb Yeager."
"What?" asked Webb, with a hopeful look in his pale-blue eyes.
"You're a prince-consort."
"Go easy," said Webb. "I never blackguarded you none."
"It's a title," explained Baldy, "up among the picture-cards; but it don't take no
tricks. I'll tell you, Webb. It's a brand they're got for certain animals in Europe.
Say that you or me or one of them Dutch dukes marries in a royal family.
Well, by and by our wife gets to be queen. Are we king? Not in a million
years. At the coronation ceremonies we march between little casino and the
Ninth Grand Custodian of the Royal Hall Bedchamber. The only use we are is
to appear in photographs, and accept the responsibility for the heir- apparent.
That ain't any square deal. Yes, sir, Webb, you're a prince- consort; and if I was
you, I'd start a interregnum or a habeus corpus or somethin'; and I'd be king if
I had to turn from the bottom of the deck."
Baldy emptied his glass to the ratification of his Warwick pose.
"Baldy," said Webb, solemnly, "me and you punched cows in the same outfit
for years. We been runnin' on the same range, and ridin' the same trails since
we was boys. I wouldn't talk about my family affairs to nobody but you. You
was line-rider on the Nopalito Ranch when I married Santa McAllister. I was
foreman then; but what am I now? I don't amount to a knot in a stake rope."
"When old McAllister was the cattle king of West Texas," continued Baldy
with Satanic sweetness, "you was some tallow. You had as much to say on the
ranch as he did."
"I did," admitted Webb, "up to the time he found out I was tryin' to get my
rope over Santa's head. Then he kept me out on the range as far from the
ranch-house as he could. When the old man died they commenced to call
Santa the 'cattle queen.' I'm boss of the cattle--that's all. She 'tends to all the
business; she handles all the money; I can't sell even a beef-steer to a party of
campers, myself. Santa's the 'queen'; and I'm Mr. Nobody."
"I'd be king if I was you," repeated Baldy Woods, the royalist. "When a man
marries a queen he ought to grade up with her--on the hoof-- dressed--dried-corned--any old way from the chaparral to the packing- house. Lots of folks
thinks it's funny, Webb, that you don't have the say-so on the Nopalito. I ain't
reflectin' none on Miz Yeager--she's the finest little lady between the Rio
Grande and next Christmas--but a man ought to be boss of his own camp."
The smooth, brown face of Yeager lengthened to a mask of wounded
melancholy. With that expression, and his rumpled yellow hair and guileless
blue eyes, he might have been likened to a schoolboy whose leadership had

been usurped by a youngster of superior strength. But his active and sinewy
seventy-two inches, and his girded revolvers forbade the comparison.
"What was that you called me, Baldy?" he asked. "What kind of a concert was
it?"
"A 'consort,'" corrected Baldy--"a 'prince-consort.' It's a kind of short-card
pseudonym. You come in sort of between Jack-high and a four-card flush."
Webb Yeager sighed, and gathered the strap of his Winchester scabbard from
the floor.
"I'm ridin' back to the ranch to-day," he said half-heartedly. "I've got to start a
bunch of beeves for San Antone in the morning."
"I'm your company as far as Dry Lake," announced Baldy. "I've got a round-up
camp on the San Marcos cuttin' out two-year-olds."
The two /companeros/ mounted their ponies and trotted away from the little
railroad settlement, where they had foregathered in the thirsty morning.
At Dry Lake, where their routes diverged, they reined up for a parting
cigarette. For miles they had ridden in silence save for the soft drum of the
ponies' hoofs on the matted mesquite grass, and the rattle of the chaparral
against their wooden stirrups. But in Texas discourse is seldom continuous.
You may fill in a mile, a meal, and a murder between your paragraphs without
detriment to your thesis. So, without apology, Webb offered an addendum to
the conversation that had begun ten miles away.
"You remember, yourself, Baldy, that there was a time when Santa wasn't quite
so independent. You remember the days when old McAllister was keepin' us
apart, and how she used to send me the sign that she wanted to see me? Old
man Mac promised to make me look like a colander if I ever come in gun-shot
of the ranch. You remember the sign she used to send, Baldy--the heart with a
cross inside of it?"
"Me?" cried Baldy, with intoxicated archness. "You old sugar-stealing coyote!
Don't I remember! Why, you dad-blamed old long-horned turtle- dove, the
boys in camp was all cognoscious about them hiroglyphs. The 'gizzard-andcrossbones' we used to call it. We used to see 'em on truck that was sent out
from the ranch. They was marked in charcoal on the sacks of flour and in leadpencil on the newspapers. I see one of 'em once chalked on the back of a new
cook that old man McAllister sent out from the ranch--danged if I didn't."
"Santa's father," explained Webb gently, "got her to promise that she wouldn't
write to me or send me any word. That heart-and-cross sign was her scheme.
Whenever she wanted to see me in particular she managed to put that mark on
somethin' at the ranch that she knew I'd see. And I never laid eyes on it but
what I burnt the wind for the ranch the same night. I used to see her in that

coma mott back of the little horse-corral."
"We knowed it," chanted Baldy; "but we never let on. We was all for you. We
knowed why you always kept that fast paint in camp. And when we see that
gizzard-and-crossbones figured out on the truck from the ranch we knowed
old Pinto was goin' to eat up miles that night instead of grass. You remember
Scurry--that educated horse-wrangler we had-- the college fellow that tanglefoot drove to the range? Whenever Scurry saw that come-meet-your-honey
brand on anything from the ranch, he'd wave his hand like that, and say, 'Our
friend Lee Andrews will again swim the Hell's point to-night.'"
"The last time Santa sent me the sign," said Webb, "was once when she was
sick. I noticed it as soon as I hit camp, and I galloped Pinto forty mile that
night. She wasn't at the coma mott. I went to the house; and old McAllister
met me at the door. 'Did you come here to get killed?' says he; 'I'll disoblige
you for once. I just started a Mexican to bring you. Santa wants you. Go in
that room and see her. And then come out here and see me.'
"Santa was lyin' in bed pretty sick. But she gives out a kind of a smile, and her
hand and mine lock horns, and I sets down by the bed-- mud and spurs and
chaps and all. 'I've heard you ridin' across the grass for hours, Webb,' she says.
'I was sure you'd come. You saw the sign?' she whispers. 'The minute I hit
camp,' says I. ''Twas marked on the bag of potatoes and onions.' 'They're
always together,' says she, soft like--'always together in life.' 'They go well
together,' I says, 'in a stew.' 'I mean hearts and crosses,' says Santa. 'Our sign-to love and to suffer--that's what they mean.'
"And there was old Doc Musgrove amusin' himself with whisky and a palmleaf fan. And by and by Santa goes to sleep; and Doc feels her forehead; and
he says to me: 'You're not such a bad febrifuge. But you'd better slide out now;
for the diagnosis don't call for you in regular doses. The little lady'll be all
right when she wakes up.'
"I seen old McAllister outside. 'She's asleep,' says I. 'And now you can start in
with your colander-work. Take your time; for I left my gun on my saddlehorn.'
"Old Mac laughs, and he says to me: 'Pumpin' lead into the best ranch- boss in
West Texas don't seem to me good business policy. I don't know where I could
get as good a one. It's the son-in-law idea, Webb, that makes me admire for to
use you as a target. You ain't my idea for a member of the family. But I can use
you on the Nopalito if you'll keep outside of a radius with the ranch-house in
the middle of it. You go upstairs and lay down on a cot, and when you get
some sleep we'll talk it over.'"
Baldy Woods pulled down his hat, and uncurled his leg from his saddle- horn.
Webb shortened his rein, and his pony danced, anxious to be off. The two men

shook hands with Western ceremony.
"/Adios/, Baldy," said Webb, "I'm glad I seen you and had this talk."
With a pounding rush that sounded like the rise of a covey of quail, the riders
sped away toward different points of the compass. A hundred yards on his
route Baldy reined in on the top of a bare knoll, and emitted a yell. He swayed
on his horse; had he been on foot, the earth would have risen and conquered
him; but in the saddle he was a master of equilibrium, and laughed at whisky,
and despised the centre of gravity.
Webb turned in his saddle at the signal.
"If I was you," came Baldy's strident and perverting tones, "I'd be king!"
At eight o'clock on the following morning Bud Turner rolled from his saddle
in front of the Nopalito ranch-house, and stumbled with whizzing rowels
toward the gallery. Bud was in charge of the bunch of beef-cattle that was to
strike the trail that morning for San Antonio. Mrs. Yeager was on the gallery
watering a cluster of hyacinths growing in a red earthenware jar.
"King" McAllister had bequeathed to his daughter many of his strong
characteristics--his resolution, his gay courage, his contumacious self-reliance,
his pride as a reigning monarch of hoofs and horns. /Allegro/ and /fortissimo/
had been McAllister's temp and tone. In Santa they survived, transposed to the
feminine key. Substantially, she preserved the image of the mother who had
been summoned to wander in other and less finite green pastures long before
the waxing herds of kine had conferred royalty upon the house. She had her
mother's slim, strong figure and grave, soft prettiness that relieved in her the
severity of the imperious McAllister eye and the McAllister air of royal
independence.
Webb stood on one end of the gallery giving orders to two or three sub-bosses
of various camps and outfits who had ridden in for instructions.
"Morning," said Bud briefly. "Where do you want them beeves to go in town-to Barber's, as usual?"
Now, to answer that had been the prerogative of the queen. All the reins of
business--buying, selling, and banking--had been held by her capable fingers.
The handling of cattle had been entrusted fully to her husband. In the days of
"King" McAllister, Santa had been his secretary and helper; and she had
continued her work with wisdom and profit. But before she could reply, the
prince-consort spake up with calm decision:
"You drive that bunch to Zimmerman and Nesbit's pens. I spoke to
Zimmerman about it some time ago."
Bud turned on his high boot-heels.

"Wait!" called Santa quickly. She looked at her husband with surprise in her
steady gray eyes.
"Why, what do you mean, Webb?" she asked, with a small wrinkle gathering
between her brows. "I never deal with Zimmerman and Nesbit. Barber has
handled every head of stock from this ranch in that market for five years. I'm
not going to take the business out of his hands." She faced Bud Turner.
"Deliver those cattle to Barber," she concluded positively.
Bud gazed impartially at the water-jar hanging on the gallery, stood on his
other leg, and chewed a mesquite-leaf.
"I want this bunch of beeves to go to Zimmerman and Nesbit," said Webb,
with a frosty light in his blue eyes.
"Nonsense," said Santa impatiently. "You'd better start on, Bud, so as to noon
at the Little Elm water-hole. Tell Barber we'll have another lot of culls ready in
about a month."
Bud allowed a hesitating eye to steal upward and meet Webb's. Webb saw
apology in his look, and fancied he saw commiseration.
"You deliver them cattle," he said grimly, "to--"
"Barber," finished Santa sharply. "Let that settle it. Is there anything else you
are waiting for, Bud?"
"No, m'm," said Bud. But before going he lingered while a cow's tail could
have switched thrice; for man is man's ally; and even the Philistines must have
blushed when they took Samson in the way they did.
"You hear your boss!" cried Webb sardonically. He took off his hat, and bowed
until it touched the floor before his wife.
"Webb," said Santa rebukingly, "you're acting mighty foolish to-day."
"Court fool, your Majesty," said Webb, in his slow tones, which had changed
their quality. "What else can you expect? Let me tell you. I was a man before I
married a cattle-queen. What am I now? The laughing-stock of the camps. I'll
be a man again."
Santa looked at him closely.
"Don't be unreasonable, Webb," she said calmly. "You haven't been slighted in
any way. Do I ever interfere in your management of the cattle? I know the
business side of the ranch much better than you do. I learned it from Dad. Be
sensible."
"Kingdoms and queendoms," said Webb, "don't suit me unless I am in the
pictures, too. I punch the cattle and you wear the crown. All right. I'd rather be
High Lord Chancellor of a cow-camp than the eight-spot in a queen-high
flush. It's your ranch; and Barber gets the beeves."

Webb's horse was tied to the rack. He walked into the house and brought out
his roll of blankets that he never took with him except on long rides, and his
"slicker," and his longest stake-rope of plaited raw-hide. These he began to tie
deliberately upon his saddle. Santa, a little pale, followed him.
Webb swung up into the saddle. His serious, smooth face was without
expression except for a stubborn light that smouldered in his eyes.
"There's a herd of cows and calves," said he, "near the Hondo water- hole on
the Frio that ought to be moved away from timber. Lobos have killed three of
the calves. I forgot to leave orders. You'd better tell Simms to attend to it."
Santa laid a hand on the horse's bridle, and looked her husband in the eye.
"Are you going to leave me, Webb?" she asked quietly.
"I am going to be a man again," he answered.
"I wish you success in a praiseworthy attempt," she said, with a sudden
coldness. She turned and walked directly into the house.
Webb Yeager rode to the southeast as straight as the topography of West Texas
permitted. And when he reached the horizon he might have ridden on into blue
space as far as knowledge of him on the Nopalito went. And the days, with
Sundays at their head, formed into hebdomadal squads; and the weeks,
captained by the full moon, closed ranks into menstrual companies crying
"Tempus fugit" on their banners; and the months marched on toward the vast
camp-ground of the years; but Webb Yeager came no more to the dominions
of his queen.
One day a being named Bartholomew, a sheep-man--and therefore of little
account--from the lower Rio Grande country, rode in sight of the Nopalito
ranch-house, and felt hunger assail him. /Ex consuetudine/ he was soon seated
at the mid-day dining table of that hospitable kingdom. Talk like water gushed
from him: he might have been smitten with Aaron's rod--that is your gentle
shepherd when an audience is vouchsafed him whose ears are not overgrown
with wool.
"Missis Yeager," he babbled, "I see a man the other day on the Rancho Seco
down in Hidalgo County by your name--Webb Yeager was his. He'd just been
engaged as manager. He was a tall, light-haired man, not saying much.
Perhaps he was some kin of yours, do you think?"
"A husband," said Santa cordially. "The Seco has done well. Mr. Yeager is one
of the best stockmen in the West."
The dropping out of a prince-consort rarely disorganises a monarchy. Queen
Santa had appointed as /mayordomo/ of the ranch a trusty subject, named
Ramsay, who had been one of her father's faithful vassals. And there was
scarcely a ripple on the Nopalito ranch save when the gulf-breeze created

undulations in the grass of its wide acres.
For several years the Nopalito had been making experiments with an English
breed of cattle that looked down with aristocratic contempt upon the Texas
long-horns. The experiments were found satisfactory; and a pasture had been
set aside for the blue-bloods. The fame of them had gone forth into the
chaparral and pear as far as men ride in saddles. Other ranches woke up,
rubbed their eyes, and looked with new dissatisfaction upon the long-horns.
As a consequence, one day a sunburned, capable, silk-kerchiefed nonchalant
youth, garnished with revolvers, and attended by three Mexican /vaqueros/,
alighted at the Nopalito ranch and presented the following business-like epistle
to the queen thereof:
Mrs. Yeager--The Nopalito Ranch:
Dear Madam:
I am instructed by the owners of the Rancho Seco to purchase 100
head of two and three-year-old cows of the Sussex breed owned by
you. If you can fill the order please deliver the cattle to the
bearer; and a check will be forwarded to you at once.
Respectfully,
Webster Yeager,
Manager the Rancho Seco.
Business is business, even--very scantily did it escape being written
"especially"--in a kingdom.
That night the 100 head of cattle were driven up from the pasture and penned
in a corral near the ranch-house for delivery in the morning.
When night closed down and the house was still, did Santa Yeager throw
herself down, clasping that formal note to her bosom, weeping, and calling out
a name that pride (either in one or the other) had kept from her lips many a
day? Or did she file the letter, in her business way, retaining her royal balance
and strength?
Wonder, if you will; but royalty is sacred; and there is a veil. But this much
you shall learn:
At midnight Santa slipped softly out of the ranch-house, clothed in something
dark and plain. She paused for a moment under the live-oak trees. The prairies
were somewhat dim, and the moonlight was pale orange, diluted with particles
of an impalpable, flying mist. But the mock-bird whistled on every bough of
vantage; leagues of flowers scented the air; and a kindergarten of little

shadowy rabbits leaped and played in an open space near by. Santa turned her
face to the southeast and threw three kisses thitherward; for there was none to
see.
Then she sped silently to the blacksmith-shop, fifty yards away; and what she
did there can only be surmised. But the forge glowed red; and there was a faint
hammering such as Cupid might make when he sharpens his arrow-points.
Later she came forth with a queer-shaped, handled thing in one hand, and a
portable furnace, such as are seen in branding-camps, in the other. To the
corral where the Sussex cattle were penned she sped with these things swiftly
in the moonlight.
She opened the gate and slipped inside the corral. The Sussex cattle were
mostly a dark red. But among this bunch was one that was milky white-notable among the others.
And now Santa shook from her shoulder something that we had not seen
before--a rope lasso. She freed the loop of it, coiling the length in her left
hand, and plunged into the thick of the cattle.
The white cow was her object. She swung the lasso, which caught one horn
and slipped off. The next throw encircled the forefeet and the animal fell
heavily. Santa made for it like a panther; but it scrambled up and dashed
against her, knocking her over like a blade of grass.
Again she made her cast, while the aroused cattle milled around the four sides
of the corral in a plunging mass. This throw was fair; the white cow came to
earth again; and before it could rise Santa had made the lasso fast around a
post of the corral with a swift and simple knot, and had leaped upon the cow
again with the rawhide hobbles.
In one minute the feet of the animal were tied (no record-breaking deed) and
Santa leaned against the corral for the same space of time, panting and lax.
And then she ran swiftly to her furnace at the gate and brought the brandingiron, queerly shaped and white-hot.
The bellow of the outraged white cow, as the iron was applied, should have
stirred the slumbering auricular nerves and consciences of the near-by subjects
of the Nopalito, but it did not. And it was amid the deepest nocturnal silence
that Santa ran like a lapwing back to the ranch-house and there fell upon a cot
and sobbed--sobbed as though queens had hearts as simple ranchmen's wives
have, and as though she would gladly make kings of prince-consorts, should
they ride back again from over the hills and far away.
In the morning the capable, revolvered youth and his /vaqueros/ set forth,
driving the bunch of Sussex cattle across the prairies to the Rancho Seco.
Ninety miles it was; a six days' journey, grazing and watering the animals on

the way.
The beasts arrived at Rancho Seco one evening at dusk; and were received and
counted by the foreman of the ranch.
The next morning at eight o'clock a horseman loped out of the brush to the
Nopalito ranch-house. He dismounted stiffly, and strode, with whizzing spurs,
to the house. His horse gave a great sigh and swayed foam-streaked, with
down-drooping head and closed eyes.
But waste not your pity upon Belshazzar, the flea-bitten sorrel. To-day, in
Nopalito horse-pasture he survives, pampered, beloved, unridden, cherished
record-holder of long-distance rides.
The horseman stumbled into the house. Two arms fell around his neck, and
someone cried out in the voice of woman and queen alike: "Webb-- oh,
Webb!"
"I was a skunk," said Webb Yeager.
"Hush," said Santa, "did you see it?"
"I saw it," said Webb.
What they meant God knows; and you shall know, if you rightly read the
primer of events.
"Be the cattle-queen," said Webb; "and overlook it if you can. I was a mangy,
sheep-stealing coyote."
"Hush!" said Santa again, laying her fingers upon his mouth. "There's no
queen here. Do you know who I am? I am Santa Yeager, First Lady of the
Bedchamber. Come here."
She dragged him from the gallery into the room to the right. There stood a
cradle with an infant in it--a red, ribald, unintelligible, babbling, beautiful
infant, sputtering at life in an unseemly manner.
"There's no queen on this ranch," said Santa again. "Look at the king. He's got
your eyes, Webb. Down on your knees and look at his Highness."
But jingling rowels sounded on the gallery, and Bud Turner stumbled there
again with the same query that he had brought, lacking a few days, a year ago.
"'Morning. Them beeves is just turned out on the trail. Shall I drive 'em to
Barber's, or--"
He saw Webb and stopped, open-mouthed.
"Ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba!" shrieked the king in his cradle, beating the air with his
fists.
"You hear your boss, Bud," said Webb Yeager, with a broad grin--just as he
had said a year ago.

And that is all, except that when old man Quinn, owner of the Rancho Seco,
went out to look over the herd of Sussex cattle that he had bought from the
Nopalito ranch, he asked his new manager:
"What's the Nopalito ranch brand, Wilson?"
"X Bar Y," said Wilson.
"I thought so," said Quinn. "But look at that white heifer there; she's got
another brand--a heart with a cross inside of it. What brand is that?"

II
THE RANSOM OF MACK
Me and old Mack Lonsbury, we got out of that Little Hide-and-Seek gold mine
affair with about $40,000 apiece. I say "old" Mack; but he wasn't old. Fortyone, I should say; but he always seemed old.
"Andy," he says to me, "I'm tired of hustling. You and me have been working
hard together for three years. Say we knock off for a while, and spend some of
this idle money we've coaxed our way."
"The proposition hits me just right," says I. "Let's be nabobs for a while and
see how it feels. What'll we do--take in the Niagara Falls, or buck at faro?"
"For a good many years," says Mack, "I've thought that if I ever had
extravagant money I'd rent a two-room cabin somewhere, hire a Chinaman to
cook, and sit in my stocking feet and read Buckle's History of Civilisation."
"That sounds self-indulgent and gratifying without vulgar ostentation," says I;
"and I don't see how money could be better invested. Give me a cuckoo clock
and a Sep Winner's Self-Instructor for the Banjo, and I'll join you."
A week afterwards me and Mack hits this small town of Pina, about thirty
miles out from Denver, and finds an elegant two-room house that just suits us.
We deposited half-a-peck of money in the Pina bank and shook hands with
every one of the 340 citizens in the town. We brought along the Chinaman and
the cuckoo clock and Buckle and the Instructor with us from Denver; and they
made the cabin seem like home at once.
Never believe it when they tell you riches don't bring happiness. If you could
have seen old Mack sitting in his rocking-chair with his blue-yarn sock feet up
in the window and absorbing in that Buckle stuff through his specs you'd have
seen a picture of content that would have made Rockefeller jealous. And I was
learning to pick out "Old Zip Coon" on the banjo, and the cuckoo was on time
with his remarks, and Ah Sing was messing up the atmosphere with the

handsomest smell of ham and eggs that ever laid the honeysuckle in the shade.
When it got too dark to make out Buckle's nonsense and the notes in the
Instructor, me and Mack would light our pipes and talk about science and
pearl diving and sciatica and Egypt and spelling and fish and trade-winds and
leather and gratitude and eagles, and a lot of subjects that we'd never had time
to explain our sentiments about before.
One evening Mack spoke up and asked me if I was much apprised in the
habits and policies of women folks.
"Why, yes," says I, in a tone of voice; "I know 'em from Alfred to Omaha. The
feminine nature and similitude," says I, "is as plain to my sight as the Rocky
Mountains is to a blue-eyed burro. I'm onto all their little side-steps and
punctual discrepancies."
"I tell you, Andy," says Mack, with a kind of sigh, "I never had the least
amount of intersection with their predispositions. Maybe I might have had a
proneness in respect to their vicinity, but I never took the time. I made my own
living since I was fourteen; and I never seemed to get my ratiocinations
equipped with the sentiments usually depicted toward the sect. I sometimes
wish I had," says old Mack.
"They're an adverse study," says I, "and adapted to points of view. Although
they vary in rationale, I have found 'em quite often obviously differing from
each other in divergences of contrast."
"It seems to me," goes on Mack, "that a man had better take 'em in and secure
his inspirations of the sect when he's young and so preordained. I let my
chance go by; and I guess I'm too old now to go hopping into the curriculum."
"Oh, I don't know," I tells him. "Maybe you better credit yourself with a barrel
of money and a lot of emancipation from a quantity of uncontent. Still, I don't
regret my knowledge of 'em," I says. "It takes a man who understands the
symptoms and by-plays of women-folks to take care of himself in this world."
We stayed on in Pina because we liked the place. Some folks might enjoy their
money with noise and rapture and locomotion; but me and Mack we had had
plenty of turmoils and hotel towels. The people were friendly; Ah Sing got the
swing of the grub we liked; Mack and Buckle were as thick as two bodysnatchers, and I was hitting out a cordial resemblance to "Buffalo Gals, Can't
You Come Out To-night," on the banjo.
One day I got a telegram from Speight, the man that was working on a mine I
had an interest in out in New Mexico. I had to go out there; and I was gone
two months. I was anxious to get back to Pina and enjoy life once more.
When I struck the cabin I nearly fainted. Mack was standing in the door; and if
angels ever wept, I saw no reason why they should be smiling then.

That man was a spectacle. Yes; he was worse; he was a spyglass; he was the
great telescope in the Lick Observatory. He had on a coat and shiny shoes and
a white vest and a high silk hat; and a geranium as big as an order of spinach
was spiked onto his front. And he was smirking and warping his face like an
infernal storekeeper or a kid with colic.
"Hello, Andy," says Mack, out of his face. "Glad to see you back. Things have
happened since you went away."
"I know it," says I, "and a sacrilegious sight it is. God never made you that
way, Mack Lonsbury. Why do you scarify His works with this presumptuous
kind of ribaldry?"
"Why, Andy," says he, "they've elected me justice of the peace since you left."
I looked at Mack close. He was restless and inspired. A justice of the peace
ought to be disconsolate and assuaged.
Just then a young woman passed on the sidewalk; and I saw Mack kind of half
snicker and blush, and then he raised up his hat and smiled and bowed, and
she smiled and bowed, and went on by.
"No hope for you," says I, "if you've got the Mary-Jane infirmity at your age. I
thought it wasn't going to take on you. And patent leather shoes! All this in
two little short months!"
"I'm going to marry the young lady who just passed to-night," says Mack, in a
kind of flutter.
"I forgot something at the post-office," says I, and walked away quick.
I overtook that young woman a hundred yards away. I raised my hat and told
her my name. She was about nineteen; and young for her age. She blushed,
and then looked at me cool, like I was the snow scene from the "Two
Orphans."
"I understand you are to be married to-night," I said.
"Correct," says she. "You got any objections?"
"Listen, sissy," I begins.
"My name is Miss Rebosa Redd," says she in a pained way.
"I know it," says I. "Now, Rebosa, I'm old enough to have owed money to
your father. And that old, specious, dressed-up, garbled, sea-sick ptomaine
prancing about avidiously like an irremediable turkey gobbler with patent
leather shoes on is my best friend. Why did you go and get him invested in
this marriage business?"
"Why, he was the only chance there was," answers Miss Rebosa.
"Nay," says I, giving a sickening look of admiration at her complexion and

style of features; "with your beauty you might pick any kind of a man. Listen,
Rebosa. Old Mack ain't the man you want. He was twenty- two when you was
/nee/ Reed, as the papers say. This bursting into bloom won't last with him.
He's all ventilated with oldness and rectitude and decay. Old Mack's down
with a case of Indian summer. He overlooked his bet when he was young; and
now he's suing Nature for the interest on the promissory note he took from
Cupid instead of the cash. Rebosa, are you bent on having this marriage
occur?"
"Why, sure I am," says she, oscillating the pansies on her hat, "and so is
somebody else, I reckon."
"What time is it to take place?" I asks.
"At six o'clock," says she.
I made up my mind right away what to do. I'd save old Mack if I could. To
have a good, seasoned, ineligible man like that turn chicken for a girl that
hadn't quit eating slate pencils and buttoning in the back was more than I
could look on with easiness.
"Rebosa," says I, earnest, drawing upon my display of knowledge concerning
the feminine intuitions of reason--"ain't there a young man in Pina--a nice
young man that you think a heap of?"
"Yep," says Rebosa, nodding her pansies--"Sure there is! What do you think!
Gracious!"
"Does he like you?" I asks. "How does he stand in the matter?"
"Crazy," says Rebosa. "Ma has to wet down the front steps to keep him from
sitting there all the time. But I guess that'll be all over after to-night," she
winds up with a sigh.
"Rebosa," says I, "you don't really experience any of this adoration called love
for old Mack, do you?"
"Lord! no," says the girl, shaking her head. "I think he's as dry as a lava bed.
The idea!"
"Who is this young man that you like, Rebosa?" I inquires.
"It's Eddie Bayles," says she. "He clerks in Crosby's grocery. But he don't
make but thirty-five a month. Ella Noakes was wild about him once."
"Old Mack tells me," I says, "that he's going to marry you at six o'clock this
evening."
"That's the time," says she. "It's to be at our house."
"Rebosa," says I, "listen to me. If Eddie Bayles had a thousand dollars cash--a
thousand dollars, mind you, would buy him a store of his own--if you and

Eddie had that much to excuse matrimony on, would you consent to marry
him this evening at five o'clock?"
The girl looks at me a minute; and I can see these inaudible cogitations going
on inside of her, as women will.
"A thousand dollars?" says she. "Of course I would."
"Come on," says I. "We'll go and see Eddie."
We went up to Crosby's store and called Eddie outside. He looked to be
estimable and freckled; and he had chills and fever when I made my
proposition.
"At five o'clock?" says he, "for a thousand dollars? Please don't wake me up!
Well, you /are/ the rich uncle retired from the spice business in India! I'll buy
out old Crosby and run the store myself."
We went inside and got old man Crosby apart and explained it. I wrote my
check for a thousand dollars and handed it to him. If Eddie and Rebosa
married each other at five he was to turn the money over to them.
And then I gave 'em my blessing, and went to wander in the wildwood for a
season. I sat on a log and made cogitations on life and old age and the zodiac
and the ways of women and all the disorder that goes with a lifetime. I passed
myself congratulations that I had probably saved my old friend Mack from his
attack of Indian summer. I knew when he got well of it and shed his
infatuation and his patent leather shoes, he would feel grateful. "To keep old
Mack disinvolved," thinks I, "from relapses like this, is worth more than a
thousand dollars." And most of all I was glad that I'd made a study of women,
and wasn't to be deceived any by their means of conceit and evolution.
It must have been half-past five when I got back home. I stepped in; and there
sat old Mack on the back of his neck in his old clothes with his blue socks on
the window and the History of Civilisation propped up on his knees.
"This don't look like getting ready for a wedding at six," I says, to seem
innocent.
"Oh," says Mack, reaching for his tobacco, "that was postponed back to five
o'clock. They sent me over a note saying the hour had been changed. It's all
over now. What made you stay away so long, Andy?"
"You heard about the wedding?" I asks.
"I operated it," says he. "I told you I was justice of the peace. The preacher is
off East to visit his folks, and I'm the only one in town that can perform the
dispensations of marriage. I promised Eddie and Rebosa a month ago I'd
marry 'em. He's a busy lad; and he'll have a grocery of his own some day."
"He will," says I.

"There was lots of women at the wedding," says Mack, smoking up. "But I
didn't seem to get any ideas from 'em. I wish I was informed in the structure of
their attainments like you said you was."
"That was two months ago," says I, reaching up for the banjo.

III
TELEMACHUS, FRIEND
Returning from a hunting trip, I waited at the little town of Los Pinos, in New
Mexico, for the south-bound train, which was one hour late. I sat on the porch
of the Summit House and discussed the functions of life with Telemachus
Hicks, the hotel proprietor.
Perceiving that personalities were not out of order, I asked him what species of
beast had long ago twisted and mutilated his left ear. Being a hunter, I was
concerned in the evils that may befall one in the pursuit of game.
"That ear," says Hicks, "is the relic of true friendship."
"An accident?" I persisted.
"No friendship is an accident," said Telemachus; and I was silent.
"The only perfect case of true friendship I ever knew," went on my host, "was
a cordial intent between a Connecticut man and a monkey. The monkey
climbed palms in Barranquilla and threw down cocoanuts to the man. The man
sawed them in two and made dippers, which he sold for two /reales/ each and
bought rum. The monkey drank the milk of the nuts. Through each being
satisfied with his own share of the graft, they lived like brothers.
"But in the case of human beings, friendship is a transitory art, subject to
discontinuance without further notice.
"I had a friend once, of the entitlement of Paisley Fish, that I imagined was
sealed to me for an endless space of time. Side by side for seven years we had
mined, ranched, sold patent churns, herded sheep, took photographs and other
things, built wire fences, and picked prunes. Thinks I, neither homocide nor
flattery nor riches nor sophistry nor drink can make trouble between me and
Paisley Fish. We was friends an amount you could hardly guess at. We was
friends in business, and we let our amicable qualities lap over and season our
hours of recreation and folly. We certainly had days of Damon and nights of
Pythias.
"One summer me and Paisley gallops down into these San Andres mountains
for the purpose of a month's surcease and levity, dressed in the natural store

habiliments of man. We hit this town of Los Pinos, which certainly was a roofgarden spot of the world, and flowing with condensed milk and honey. It had a
street or two, and air, and hens, and a eating-house; and that was enough for
us.
"We strikes the town after supper-time, and we concludes to sample whatever
efficacy there is in this eating-house down by the railroad tracks. By the time
we had set down and pried up our plates with a knife from the red oil-cloth,
along intrudes Widow Jessup with the hot biscuit and the fried liver.
"Now, there was a woman that would have tempted an anchovy to forget his
vows. She was not so small as she was large; and a kind of welcome air
seemed to mitigate her vicinity. The pink of her face was the /in hoc signo/ of
a culinary temper and a warm disposition, and her smile would have brought
out the dogwood blossoms in December.
"Widow Jessup talks to us a lot of garrulousness about the climate and history
and Tennyson and prunes and the scarcity of mutton, and finally wants to
know where we came from.
"'Spring Valley,' says I.
"'Big Spring Valley,' chips in Paisley, out of a lot of potatoes and knuckle-bone
of ham in his mouth.
"That was the first sign I noticed that the old /fidus Diogenes/ business
between me and Paisley Fish was ended forever. He knew how I hated a
talkative person, and yet he stampedes into the conversation with his
amendments and addendums of syntax. On the map it was Big Spring Valley;
but I had heard Paisley himself call it Spring Valley a thousand times.
"Without saying any more, we went out after supper and set on the railroad
track. We had been pardners too long not to know what was going on in each
other's mind.
"'I reckon you understand,' says Paisley, 'that I've made up my mind to accrue
that widow woman as part and parcel in and to my hereditaments forever, both
domestic, sociable, legal, and otherwise, until death us do part.'
"'Why, yes,' says I, 'I read it between the lines, though you only spoke one.
And I suppose you are aware,' says I, 'that I have a movement on foot that
leads up to the widow's changing her name to Hicks, and leaves you writing to
the society column to inquire whether the best man wears a japonica or
seamless socks at the wedding!'
"'There'll be some hiatuses in your program,' says Paisley, chewing up a piece
of a railroad tie. 'I'd give in to you,' says he, 'in 'most any respect if it was
secular affairs, but this is not so. The smiles of woman,' goes on Paisley, 'is the
whirlpool of Squills and Chalybeates, into which vortex the good ship

Friendship is often drawn and dismembered. I'd assault a bear that was
annoying you,' says Paisley, 'or I'd endorse your note, or rub the place between
your shoulder-blades with opodeldoc the same as ever; but there my sense of
etiquette ceases. In this fracas with Mrs. Jessup we play it alone. I've notified
you fair.'
"And then I collaborates with myself, and offers the following resolutions and
by-laws:
"'Friendship between man and man,' says I, 'is an ancient historical virtue
enacted in the days when men had to protect each other against lizards with
eighty-foot tails and flying turtles. And they've kept up the habit to this day,
and stand by each other till the bellboy comes up and tells them the animals
are not really there. I've often heard,' I says, 'about ladies stepping in and
breaking up a friendship between men. Why should that be? I'll tell you,
Paisley, the first sight and hot biscuit of Mrs. Jessup appears to have inserted a
oscillation into each of our bosoms. Let the best man of us have her. I'll play
you a square game, and won't do any underhanded work. I'll do all of my
courting of her in your presence, so you will have an equal opportunity. With
that arrangement I don't see why our steamboat of friendship should fall
overboard in the medicinal whirlpools you speak of, whichever of us wins
out.'
"'Good old hoss!' says Paisley, shaking my hand. 'And I'll do the same,' says
he. 'We'll court the lady synonymously, and without any of the prudery and
bloodshed usual to such occasions. And we'll be friends still, win or lose.'
"At one side of Mrs. Jessup's eating-house was a bench under some trees
where she used to sit in the breeze after the south-bound had been fed and
gone. And there me and Paisley used to congregate after supper and make
partial payments on our respects to the lady of our choice. And we was so
honorable and circuitous in our calls that if one of us got there first we waited
for the other before beginning any gallivantery.
"The first evening that Mrs. Jessup knew about our arrangement I got to the
bench before Paisley did. Supper was just over, and Mrs. Jessup was out there
with a fresh pink dress on, and almost cool enough to handle.
"I sat down by her and made a few specifications about the moral surface of
nature as set forth by the landscape and the contiguous perspective. That
evening was surely a case in point. The moon was attending to business in the
section of sky where it belonged, and the trees was making shadows on the
ground according to science and nature, and there was a kind of conspicuous
hullabaloo going on in the bushes between the bullbats and the orioles and the
jack-rabbits and other feathered insects of the forest. And the wind out of the
mountains was singing like a Jew's-harp in the pile of old tomato-cans by the

railroad track.
"I felt a kind of sensation in my left side--something like dough rising in a
crock by the fire. Mrs. Jessup had moved up closer.
"'Oh, Mr. Hicks,' says she, 'when one is alone in the world, don't they feel it
more aggravated on a beautiful night like this?'
"I rose up off the bench at once.
"'Excuse me, ma'am,' says I, 'but I'll have to wait till Paisley comes before I
can give a audible hearing to leading questions like that.'
"And then I explained to her how we was friends cinctured by years of
embarrassment and travel and complicity, and how we had agreed to take no
advantage of each other in any of the more mushy walks of life, such as might
be fomented by sentiment and proximity. Mrs. Jessup appears to think serious
about the matter for a minute, and then she breaks into a species of laughter
that makes the wildwood resound.
"In a few minutes Paisley drops around, with oil of bergamot on his hair, and
sits on the other side of Mrs. Jessup, and inaugurates a sad tale of adventure in
which him and Pieface Lumley has a skinning-match of dead cows in '95 for a
silver-mounted saddle in the Santa Rita valley during the nine months'
drought.
"Now, from the start of that courtship I had Paisley Fish hobbled and tied to a
post. Each one of us had a different system of reaching out for the easy places
in the female heart. Paisley's scheme was to petrify 'em with wonderful
relations of events that he had either come across personally or in large print. I
think he must have got his idea of subjugation from one of Shakespeare's
shows I see once called 'Othello.' There is a coloured man in it who acquires a
duke's daughter by disbursing to her a mixture of the talk turned out by Rider
Haggard, Lew Dockstader, and Dr. Parkhurst. But that style of courting don't
work well off the stage.
"Now, I give you my own recipe for inveigling a woman into that state of
affairs when she can be referred to as '/nee/ Jones.' Learn how to pick up her
hand and hold it, and she's yours. It ain't so easy. Some men grab at it so much
like they was going to set a dislocation of the shoulder that you can smell the
arnica and hear 'em tearing off bandages. Some take it up like a hot horseshoe,
and hold it off at arm's length like a druggist pouring tincture of asafoetida in a
bottle. And most of 'em catch hold of it and drag it right out before the lady's
eyes like a boy finding a baseball in the grass, without giving her a chance to
forget that the hand is growing on the end of her arm. Them ways are all
wrong.
"I'll tell you the right way. Did you ever see a man sneak out in the back yard

and pick up a rock to throw at a tomcat that was sitting on a fence looking at
him? He pretends he hasn't got a thing in his hand, and that the cat don't see
him, and that he don't see the cat. That's the idea. Never drag her hand out
where she'll have to take notice of it. Don't let her know that you think she
knows you have the least idea she is aware you are holding her hand. That was
my rule of tactics; and as far as Paisley's serenade about hostilities and
misadventure went, he might as well have been reading to her a time- table of
the Sunday trains that stop at Ocean Grove, New Jersey.
"One night when I beat Paisley to the bench by one pipeful, my friendship gets
subsidised for a minute, and I asks Mrs. Jessup if she didn't think a 'H' was
easier to write than a 'J.' In a second her head was mashing the oleander flower
in my button-hole, and I leaned over and--but I didn't.
"'If you don't mind,' says I, standing up, 'we'll wait for Paisley to come before
finishing this. I've never done anything dishonourable yet to our friendship,
and this won't be quite fair.'
"'Mr. Hicks,' says Mrs. Jessup, looking at me peculiar in the dark, 'if it wasn't
for but one thing, I'd ask you to hike yourself down the gulch and never
disresume your visits to my house.'
"'And what is that, ma'am?' I asks.
"'You are too good a friend not to make a good husband,' says she.
"In five minutes Paisley was on his side of Mrs. Jessup.
"'In Silver City, in the summer of '98,' he begins, 'I see Jim Batholomew chew
off a Chinaman's ear in the Blue Light Saloon on account of a crossbarred
muslin shirt that--what was that noise?'
"I had resumed matters again with Mrs. Jessup right where we had left off.
"'Mrs. Jessup,' says I, 'has promised to make it Hicks. And this is another of
the same sort.'
"Paisley winds his feet round a leg of the bench and kind of groans.
"'Lem,' says he, 'we been friends for seven years. Would you mind not kissing
Mrs. Jessup quite so loud? I'd do the same for you.'
"'All right,' says I. 'The other kind will do as well.'
"'This Chinaman,' goes on Paisley, 'was the one that shot a man named Mullins
in the spring of '97, and that was--'
"Paisley interrupted himself again.
"'Lem,' says he, 'if you was a true friend you wouldn't hug Mrs. Jessup quite so
hard. I felt the bench shake all over just then. You know you told me you
would give me an even chance as long as there was any.'

"'Mr. Man,' says Mrs. Jessup, turning around to Paisley, 'if you was to drop in
to the celebration of mine and Mr. Hicks's silver wedding, twenty-five years
from now, do you think you could get it into that Hubbard squash you call
your head that you are /nix cum rous/ in this business? I've put up with you a
long time because you was Mr. Hicks's friend; but it seems to me it's time for
you to wear the willow and trot off down the hill.'
"'Mrs. Jessup,' says I, without losing my grasp on the situation as fiance, 'Mr.
Paisley is my friend, and I offered him a square deal and a equal opportunity
as long as there was a chance.'
"'A chance!' says she. 'Well, he may think he has a chance; but I hope he won't
think he's got a cinch, after what he's been next to all the evening.'
"Well, a month afterwards me and Mrs. Jessup was married in the Los Pinos
Methodist Church; and the whole town closed up to see the performance.
"When we lined up in front and the preacher was beginning to sing out his
rituals and observances, I looks around and misses Paisley. I calls time on the
preacher. 'Paisley ain't here,' says I. 'We've got to wait for Paisley. A friend
once, a friend always--that's Telemachus Hicks,' says I. Mrs. Jessup's eyes
snapped some; but the preacher holds up the incantations according to
instructions.
"In a few minutes Paisley gallops up the aisle, putting on a cuff as he comes.
He explains that the only dry-goods store in town was closed for the wedding,
and he couldn't get the kind of a boiled shirt that his taste called for until he
had broke open the back window of the store and helped himself. Then he
ranges up on the other side of the bride, and the wedding goes on. I always
imagined that Paisley calculated as a last chance that the preacher might marry
him to the widow by mistake.
"After the proceedings was over we had tea and jerked antelope and canned
apricots, and then the populace hiked itself away. Last of all Paisley shook me
by the hand and told me I'd acted square and on the level with him and he was
proud to call me a friend.
"The preacher had a small house on the side of the street that he'd fixed up to
rent; and he allowed me and Mrs. Hicks to occupy it till the ten-forty train the
next morning, when we was going on a bridal tour to El Paso. His wife had
decorated it all up with hollyhocks and poison ivy, and it looked real festal and
bowery.
"About ten o'clock that night I sets down in the front door and pulls off my
boots a while in the cool breeze, while Mrs. Hicks was fixing around in the
room. Right soon the light went out inside; and I sat there a while
reverberating over old times and scenes. And then I heard Mrs. Hicks call out,
'Ain't you coming in soon, Lem?'

"'Well, well!' says I, kind of rousing up. 'Durn me if I wasn't waiting for old
Paisley to--'
"But when I got that far," concluded Telemachus Hicks, "I thought somebody
had shot this left ear of mine off with a forty-five. But it turned out to be only
a lick from a broomhandle in the hands of Mrs. Hicks."

IV
THE HANDBOOK OF HYMEN
'Tis the opinion of myself, Sanderson Pratt, who sets this down, that the
educational system of the United States should be in the hands of the weather
bureau. I can give you good reasons for it; and you can't tell me why our
college professors shouldn't be transferred to the meteorological department.
They have been learned to read; and they could very easily glance at the
morning papers and then wire in to the main office what kind of weather to
expect. But there's the other side of the proposition. I am going on to tell you
how the weather furnished me and Idaho Green with an elegant education.
We was up in the Bitter Root Mountains over the Montana line prospecting for
gold. A chin-whiskered man in Walla-Walla, carrying a line of hope as excess
baggage, had grubstaked us; and there we was in the foothills pecking away,
with enough grub on hand to last an army through a peace conference.
Along one day comes a mail-rider over the mountains from Carlos, and stops
to eat three cans of greengages, and leave us a newspaper of modern date. This
paper prints a system of premonitions of the weather, and the card it dealt
Bitter Root Mountains from the bottom of the deck was "warmer and fair, with
light westerly breezes."
That evening it began to snow, with the wind strong in the east. Me and Idaho
moved camp into an old empty cabin higher up the mountain, thinking it was
only a November flurry. But after falling three foot on a level it went to work
in earnest; and we knew we was snowed in. We got in plenty of firewood
before it got deep, and we had grub enough for two months, so we let the
elements rage and cut up all they thought proper.
If you want to instigate the art of manslaughter just shut two men up in a
eighteen by twenty-foot cabin for a month. Human nature won't stand it.
When the first snowflakes fell me and Idaho Green laughed at each other's
jokes and praised the stuff we turned out of a skillet and called bread. At the
end of three weeks Idaho makes this kind of a edict to me. Says he:
"I never exactly heard sour milk dropping out of a balloon on the bottom of a

tin pan, but I have an idea it would be music of the spears compared to this
attenuated stream of asphyxiated thought that emanates out of your organs of
conversation. The kind of half- masticated noises that you emit every day puts
me in mind of a cow's cud, only she's lady enough to keep hers to herself, and
you ain't."
"Mr. Green," says I, "you having been a friend of mine once, I have some
hesitations in confessing to you that if I had my choice for society between
you and a common yellow, three-legged cur pup, one of the inmates of this
here cabin would be wagging a tail just at present."
This way we goes on for two or three days, and then we quits speaking to one
another. We divides up the cooking implements, and Idaho cooks his grub on
one side of the fireplace, and me on the other. The snow is up to the windows,
and we have to keep a fire all day.
You see me and Idaho never had any education beyond reading and doing "if
John had three apples and James five" on a slate. We never felt any special
need for a university degree, though we had acquired a species of intrinsic
intelligence in knocking around the world that we could use in emergencies.
But, snowbound in that cabin in the Bitter Roots, we felt for the first time that
if we had studied Homer or Greek and fractions and the higher branches of
information, we'd have had some resources in the line of meditation and
private thought. I've seen them Eastern college fellows working in camps all
through the West, and I never noticed but what education was less of a
drawback to 'em than you would think. Why, once over on Snake River, when
Andrew McWilliams' saddle horse got the botts, he sent a buckboard ten miles
for one of these strangers that claimed to be a botanist. But that horse died.
One morning Idaho was poking around with a stick on top of a little shelf that
was too high to reach. Two books fell down to the floor. I started toward 'em,
but caught Idaho's eye. He speaks for the first time in a week.
"Don't burn your fingers," says he. "In spite of the fact that you're only fit to
be the companion of a sleeping mud-turtle, I'll give you a square deal. And
that's more than your parents did when they turned you loose in the world with
the sociability of a rattle-snake and the bedside manner of a frozen turnip. I'll
play you a game of seven-up, the winner to pick up his choice of the book, the
loser to take the other."
We played; and Idaho won. He picked up his book; and I took mine. Then
each of us got on his side of the house and went to reading.
I never was as glad to see a ten-ounce nugget as I was that book. And Idaho
took at his like a kid looks at a stick of candy.
Mine was a little book about five by six inches called "Herkimer's Handbook
of Indispensable Information." I may be wrong, but I think that was the

greatest book that ever was written. I've got it to-day; and I can stump you or
any man fifty times in five minutes with the information in it. Talk about
Solomon or the New York /Tribune/! Herkimer had cases on both of 'em. That
man must have put in fifty years and travelled a million miles to find out all
that stuff. There was the population of all cities in it, and the way to tell a girl's
age, and the number of teeth a camel has. It told you the longest tunnel in the
world, the number of the stars, how long it takes for chicken pox to break out,
what a lady's neck ought to measure, the veto powers of Governors, the dates
of the Roman aqueducts, how many pounds of rice going without three beers a
day would buy, the average annual temperature of Augusta, Maine, the
quantity of seed required to plant an acre of carrots in drills, antidotes for
poisons, the number of hairs on a blond lady's head, how to preserve eggs, the
height of all the mountains in the world, and the dates of all wars and battles,
and how to restore drowned persons, and sunstroke, and the number of tacks
in a pound, and how to make dynamite and flowers and beds, and what to do
before the doctor comes--and a hundred times as many things besides. If there
was anything Herkimer didn't know I didn't miss it out of the book.
I sat and read that book for four hours. All the wonders of education was
compressed in it. I forgot the snow, and I forgot that me and old Idaho was on
the outs. He was sitting still on a stool reading away with a kind of partly soft
and partly mysterious look shining through his tan-bark whiskers.
"Idaho," says I, "what kind of a book is yours?"
Idaho must have forgot, too, for he answered moderate, without any slander or
malignity.
"Why," says he, "this here seems to be a volume by Homer K. M."
"Homer K. M. what?" I asks.
"Why, just Homer K. M.," says he.
"You're a liar," says I, a little riled that Idaho should try to put me up a tree.
"No man is going 'round signing books with his initials. If it's Homer K. M.
Spoopendyke, or Homer K. M. McSweeney, or Homer K. M. Jones, why don't
you say so like a man instead of biting off the end of it like a calf chewing off
the tail of a shirt on a clothes- line?"
"I put it to you straight, Sandy," says Idaho, quiet. "It's a poem book," says he,
"by Homer K. M. I couldn't get colour out of it at first, but there's a vein if you
follow it up. I wouldn't have missed this book for a pair of red blankets."
"You're welcome to it," says I. "What I want is a disinterested statement of
facts for the mind to work on, and that's what I seem to find in the book I've
drawn."
"What you've got," says Idaho, "is statistics, the lowest grade of information

that exists. They'll poison your mind. Give me old K. M.'s system of surmises.
He seems to be a kind of a wine agent. His regular toast is 'nothing doing,' and
he seems to have a grouch, but he keeps it so well lubricated with booze that
his worst kicks sound like an invitation to split a quart. But it's poetry," says
Idaho, "and I have sensations of scorn for that truck of yours that tries to
convey sense in feet and inches. When it comes to explaining the instinct of
philosophy through the art of nature, old K. M. has got your man beat by
drills, rows, paragraphs, chest measurement, and average annual rainfall."
So that's the way me and Idaho had it. Day and night all the excitement we got
was studying our books. That snowstorm sure fixed us with a fine lot of
attainments apiece. By the time the snow melted, if you had stepped up to me
suddenly and said: "Sanderson Pratt, what would it cost per square foot to lay
a roof with twenty by twenty- eight tin at nine dollars and fifty cents per box?"
I'd have told you as quick as light could travel the length of a spade handle at
the rate of one hundred and ninety-two thousand miles per second. How many
can do it? You wake up 'most any man you know in the middle of the night,
and ask him quick to tell you the number of bones in the human skeleton
exclusive of the teeth, or what percentage of the vote of the Nebraska
Legislature overrules a veto. Will he tell you? Try him and see.
About what benefit Idaho got out of his poetry book I didn't exactly know.
Idaho boosted the wine-agent every time he opened his mouth; but I wasn't so
sure.
This Homer K. M., from what leaked out of his libretto through Idaho, seemed
to me to be a kind of a dog who looked at life like it was a tin can tied to his
tail. After running himself half to death, he sits down, hangs his tongue out,
and looks at the can and says:
"Oh, well, since we can't shake the growler, let's get it filled at the corner, and
all have a drink on me."
Besides that, it seems he was a Persian; and I never hear of Persia producing
anything worth mentioning unless it was Turkish rugs and Maltese cats.
That spring me and Idaho struck pay ore. It was a habit of ours to sell out
quick and keep moving. We unloaded our grubstaker for eight thousand
dollars apiece; and then we drifted down to this little town of Rosa, on the
Salmon river, to rest up, and get some human grub, and have our whiskers
harvested.
Rosa was no mining-camp. It laid in the valley, and was as free of uproar and
pestilence as one of them rural towns in the country. There was a three-mile
trolley line champing its bit in the environs; and me and Idaho spent a week
riding on one of the cars, dropping off at nights at the Sunset View Hotel.
Being now well read as well as travelled, we was soon /pro re nata/ with the

best society in Rosa, and was invited out to the most dressed-up and hightoned entertainments. It was at a piano recital and quail-eating contest in the
city hall, for the benefit of the fire company, that me and Idaho first met Mrs.
De Ormond Sampson, the queen of Rosa society.
Mrs. Sampson was a widow, and owned the only two-story house in town. It
was painted yellow, and whichever way you looked from you could see it as
plain as egg on the chin of an O'Grady on a Friday. Twenty-two men in Rosa
besides me and Idaho was trying to stake a claim on that yellow house.
There was a dance after the song books and quail bones had been raked out of
the Hall. Twenty-three of the bunch galloped over to Mrs. Sampson and asked
for a dance. I side-stepped the two-step, and asked permission to escort her
home. That's where I made a hit.
On the way home says she:
"Ain't the stars lovely and bright to-night, Mr. Pratt?"
"For the chance they've got," says I, "they're humping themselves in a mighty
creditable way. That big one you see is sixty-six million miles distant. It took
thirty-six years for its light to reach us. With an eighteen-foot telescope you
can see forty-three millions of 'em, including them of the thirteenth magnitude,
which, if one was to go out now, you would keep on seeing it for twenty-seven
hundred years."
"My!" says Mrs. Sampson. "I never knew that before. How warm it is! I'm as
damp as I can be from dancing so much."
"That's easy to account for," says I, "when you happen to know that you've got
two million sweat-glands working all at once. If every one of your
perspiratory ducts, which are a quarter of an inch long, was placed end to end,
they would reach a distance of seven miles."
"Lawsy!" says Mrs. Sampson. "It sounds like an irrigation ditch you was
describing, Mr. Pratt. How do you get all this knowledge of information?"
"From observation, Mrs. Sampson," I tells her. "I keep my eyes open when I
go about the world."
"Mr. Pratt," says she, "I always did admire a man of education. There are so
few scholars among the sap-headed plug-uglies of this town that it is a real
pleasure to converse with a gentleman of culture. I'd be gratified to have you
call at my house whenever you feel so inclined."
And that was the way I got the goodwill of the lady in the yellow house. Every
Tuesday and Friday evening I used to go there and tell her about the wonders
of the universe as discovered, tabulated, and compiled from nature by
Herkimer. Idaho and the other gay Lutherans of the town got every minute of
the rest of the week that they could.

I never imagined that Idaho was trying to work on Mrs. Sampson with old K.
M.'s rules of courtship till one afternoon when I was on my way over to take
her a basket of wild hog-plums. I met the lady coming down the lane that led
to her house. Her eyes was snapping, and her hat made a dangerous dip over
one eye.
"Mr. Pratt," she opens up, "this Mr. Green is a friend of yours, I believe."
"For nine years," says I.
"Cut him out," says she. "He's no gentleman!"
"Why ma'am," says I, "he's a plain incumbent of the mountains, with asperities
and the usual failings of a spendthrift and a liar, but I never on the most
momentous occasion had the heart to deny that he was a gentleman. It may be
that in haberdashery and the sense of arrogance and display Idaho offends the
eye, but inside, ma'am, I've found him impervious to the lower grades of crime
and obesity. After nine years of Idaho's society, Mrs. Sampson," I winds up, "I
should hate to impute him, and I should hate to see him imputed."
"It's right plausible of you, Mr. Pratt," says Mrs. Sampson, "to take up the
curmudgeons in your friend's behalf; but it don't alter the fact that he has made
proposals to me sufficiently obnoxious to ruffle the ignominy of any lady."
"Why, now, now, now!" says I. "Old Idaho do that! I could believe it of
myself, sooner. I never knew but one thing to deride in him; and a blizzard
was responsible for that. Once while we was snow-bound in the mountains he
became a prey to a kind of spurious and uneven poetry, which may have
corrupted his demeanour."
"It has," says Mrs. Sampson. "Ever since I knew him he has been reciting to
me a lot of irreligious rhymes by some person he calls Ruby Ott, and who is
no better than she should be, if you judge by her poetry."
"Then Idaho has struck a new book," says I, "for the one he had was by a man
who writes under the /nom de plume/ of K. M."
"He'd better have stuck to it," says Mrs. Sampson, "whatever it was. And today he caps the vortex. I get a bunch of flowers from him, and on 'em is
pinned a note. Now, Mr. Pratt, you know a lady when you see her; and you
know how I stand in Rosa society. Do you think for a moment that I'd skip out
to the woods with a man along with a jug of wine and a loaf of bread, and go
singing and cavorting up and down under the trees with him? I take a little
claret with my meals, but I'm not in the habit of packing a jug of it into the
brush and raising Cain in any such style as that. And of course he'd bring his
book of verses along, too. He said so. Let him go on his scandalous picnics
alone! Or let him take his Ruby Ott with him. I reckon she wouldn't kick
unless it was on account of there being too much bread along. And what do

you think of your gentleman friend now, Mr. Pratt?"
"Well, 'm," says I, "it may be that Idaho's invitation was a kind of poetry, and
meant no harm. May be it belonged to the class of rhymes they call figurative.
They offend law and order, but they get sent through the mails on the grounds
that they mean something that they don't say. I'd be glad on Idaho's account if
you'd overlook it," says I, "and let us extricate our minds from the low regions
of poetry to the higher planes of fact and fancy. On a beautiful afternoon like
this, Mrs. Sampson," I goes on, "we should let our thoughts dwell accordingly.
Though it is warm here, we should remember that at the equator the line of
perpetual frost is at an altitude of fifteen thousand feet. Between the latitudes
of forty degrees and forty-nine degrees it is from four thousand to nine
thousand feet."
"Oh, Mr. Pratt," says Mrs. Sampson, "it's such a comfort to hear you say them
beautiful facts after getting such a jar from that minx of a Ruby's poetry!"
"Let us sit on this log at the roadside," says I, "and forget the inhumanity and
ribaldry of the poets. It is in the glorious columns of ascertained facts and
legalised measures that beauty is to be found. In this very log we sit upon,
Mrs. Sampson," says I, "is statistics more wonderful than any poem. The rings
show it was sixty years old. At the depth of two thousand feet it would become
coal in three thousand years. The deepest coal mine in the world is at
Killingworth, near Newcastle. A box four feet long, three feet wide, and two
feet eight inches deep will hold one ton of coal. If an artery is cut, compress it
above the wound. A man's leg contains thirty bones. The Tower of London
was burned in 1841."
"Go on, Mr. Pratt," says Mrs. Sampson. "Them ideas is so original and
soothing. I think statistics are just as lovely as they can be."
But it wasn't till two weeks later that I got all that was coming to me out of
Herkimer.
One night I was waked up by folks hollering "Fire!" all around. I jumped up
and dressed and went out of the hotel to enjoy the scene. When I see it was
Mrs. Sampson's house, I gave forth a kind of yell, and I was there in two
minutes.
The whole lower story of the yellow house was in flames, and every
masculine, feminine, and canine in Rosa was there, screeching and barking
and getting in the way of the firemen. I saw Idaho trying to get away from six
firemen who were holding him. They was telling him the whole place was on
fire down-stairs, and no man could go in it and come out alive.
"Where's Mrs. Sampson?" I asks.
"She hasn't been seen," says one of the firemen. "She sleeps up- stairs. We've

tried to get in, but we can't, and our company hasn't got any ladders yet."
I runs around to the light of the big blaze, and pulls the Handbook out of my
inside pocket. I kind of laughed when I felt it in my hands --I reckon I was
some daffy with the sensation of excitement.
"Herky, old boy," I says to it, as I flipped over the pages, "you ain't ever lied to
me yet, and you ain't ever throwed me down at a scratch yet. Tell me what, old
boy, tell me what!" says I.
I turned to "What to do in Case of Accidents," on page 117. I run my finger
down the page, and struck it. Good old Herkimer, he never overlooked
anything! It said:
Suffocation from Inhaling Smoke or Gas.--There is nothing better than
flaxseed. Place a few seed in the outer corner of the eye.
I shoved the Handbook back in my pocket, and grabbed a boy that was
running by.
"Here," says I, giving him some money, "run to the drug store and bring a
dollar's worth of flaxseed. Hurry, and you'll get another one for yourself.
Now," I sings out to the crowd, "we'll have Mrs. Sampson!" And I throws
away my coat and hat.
Four of the firemen and citizens grabs hold of me. It's sure death, they say, to
go in the house, for the floors was beginning to fall through.
"How in blazes," I sings out, kind of laughing yet, but not feeling like it, "do
you expect me to put flaxseed in a eye without the eye?"
I jabbed each elbow in a fireman's face, kicked the bark off of one citizen's
shin, and tripped the other one with a side hold. And then I busted into the
house. If I die first I'll write you a letter and tell you if it's any worse down
there than the inside of that yellow house was; but don't believe it yet. I was a
heap more cooked than the hurry-up orders of broiled chicken that you get in
restaurants. The fire and smoke had me down on the floor twice, and was
about to shame Herkimer, but the firemen helped me with their little stream of
water, and I got to Mrs. Sampson's room. She'd lost conscientiousness from
the smoke, so I wrapped her in the bed clothes and got her on my shoulder.
Well, the floors wasn't as bad as they said, or I never could have done it--not
by no means.
I carried her out fifty yards from the house and laid her on the grass. Then, of
course, every one of them other twenty-two plaintiff's to the lady's hand
crowded around with tin dippers of water ready to save her. And up runs the
boy with the flaxseed.
I unwrapped the covers from Mrs. Sampson's head. She opened her eyes and
says:

"Is that you, Mr. Pratt?"
"S-s-sh," says I. "Don't talk till you've had the remedy."
I runs my arm around her neck and raises her head, gentle, and breaks the bag
of flaxseed with the other hand; and as easy as I could I bends over and slips
three or four of the seeds in the outer corner of her eye.
Up gallops the village doc by this time, and snorts around, and grabs at Mrs.
Sampson's pulse, and wants to know what I mean by any such sandblasted
nonsense.
"Well, old Jalap and Jerusalem oakseed," says I, "I'm no regular practitioner,
but I'll show you my authority, anyway."
They fetched my coat, and I gets out the Handbook.
"Look on page 117," says I, "at the remedy for suffocation by smoke or gas.
Flaxseed in the outer corner of the eye, it says. I don't know whether it works
as a smoke consumer or whether it hikes the compound gastro-hippopotamus
nerve into action, but Herkimer says it, and he was called to the case first. If
you want to make it a consultation, there's no objection."
Old doc takes the book and looks at it by means of his specs and a fireman's
lantern.
"Well, Mr. Pratt," says he, "you evidently got on the wrong line in reading
your diagnosis. The recipe for suffocation says: 'Get the patient into fresh air
as quickly as possible, and place in a reclining position.' The flaxseed remedy
is for 'Dust and Cinders in the Eye,' on the line above. But, after all--"
"See here," interrupts Mrs. Sampson, "I reckon I've got something to say in
this consultation. That flaxseed done me more good than anything I ever
tried." And then she raises up her head and lays it back on my arm again, and
says: "Put some in the other eye, Sandy dear."
And so if you was to stop off at Rosa to-morrow, or any other day, you'd see a
fine new yellow house with Mrs. Pratt, that was Mrs. Sampson, embellishing
and adorning it. And if you was to step inside you'd see on the marble-top
centre table in the parlour "Herkimer's Handbook of Indispensable
Information," all rebound in red morocco, and ready to be consulted on any
subject pertaining to human happiness and wisdom.

V
THE PIMIENTA PANCAKES
While we were rounding up a bunch of the Triangle-O cattle in the Frio

bottoms a projecting branch of a dead mesquite caught my wooden stirrup and
gave my ankle a wrench that laid me up in camp for a week.
On the third day of my compulsory idleness I crawled out near the grub
wagon, and reclined helpless under the conversational fire of Judson Odom,
the camp cook. Jud was a monologist by nature, whom Destiny, with
customary blundering, had set in a profession wherein he was bereaved, for
the greater portion of his time, of an audience.
Therefore, I was manna in the desert of Jud's obmutescence.
Betimes I was stirred by invalid longings for something to eat that did not
come under the caption of "grub." I had visions of the maternal pantry "deep
as first love, and wild with all regret," and then I asked:
"Jud, can you make pancakes?"
Jud laid down his six-shooter, with which he was preparing to pound an
antelope steak, and stood over me in what I felt to be a menacing attitude. He
further endorsed my impression that his pose was resentful by fixing upon me
with his light blue eyes a look of cold suspicion.
"Say, you," he said, with candid, though not excessive, choler, "did you mean
that straight, or was you trying to throw the gaff into me? Some of the boys
been telling you about me and that pancake racket?"
"No, Jud," I said, sincerely, "I meant it. It seems to me I'd swap my pony and
saddle for a stack of buttered brown pancakes with some first crop, open
kettle, New Orleans sweetening. Was there a story about pancakes?"
Jud was mollified at once when he saw that I had not been dealing in allusions.
He brought some mysterious bags and tin boxes from the grub wagon and set
them in the shade of the hackberry where I lay reclined. I watched him as he
began to arrange them leisurely and untie their many strings.
"No, not a story," said Jud, as he worked, "but just the logical disclosures in
the case of me and that pink-eyed snoozer from Mired Mule Canada and Miss
Willella Learight. I don't mind telling you.
"I was punching then for old Bill Toomey, on the San Miguel. One day I gets
all ensnared up in aspirations for to eat some canned grub that hasn't ever
mooed or baaed or grunted or been in peck measures. So, I gets on my bronc
and pushes the wind for Uncle Emsley Telfair's store at the Pimienta Crossing
on the Nueces.
"About three in the afternoon I throwed my bridle rein over a mesquite limb
and walked the last twenty yards into Uncle Emsley's store. I got up on the
counter and told Uncle Emsley that the signs pointed to the devastation of the
fruit crop of the world. In a minute I had a bag of crackers and a long-handled
spoon, with an open can each of apricots and pineapples and cherries and

greengages beside of me with Uncle Emsley busy chopping away with the
hatchet at the yellow clings. I was feeling like Adam before the apple
stampede, and was digging my spurs into the side of the counter and working
with my twenty-four-inch spoon when I happened to look out of the window
into the yard of Uncle Emsley's house, which was next to the store.
"There was a girl standing there--an imported girl with fixings on-philandering with a croquet maul and amusing herself by watching my style of
encouraging the fruit canning industry.
"I slid off the counter and delivered up my shovel to Uncle Emsley.
"'That's my niece,' says he; 'Miss Willella Learight, down from Palestine on a
visit. Do you want that I should make you acquainted?'
"'The Holy Land,' I says to myself, my thoughts milling some as I tried to run
'em into the corral. 'Why not? There was sure angels in Pales--Why, yes,
Uncle Emsley,' I says out loud, 'I'd be awful edified to meet Miss Learight.'
"So Uncle Emsley took me out in the yard and gave us each other's
entitlements.
"I never was shy about women. I never could understand why some men who
can break a mustang before breakfast and shave in the dark, get all left-handed
and full of perspiration and excuses when they see a bold of calico draped
around what belongs to it. Inside of eight minutes me and Miss Willella was
aggravating the croquet balls around as amiable as second cousins. She gave
me a dig about the quantity of canned fruit I had eaten, and I got back at her,
flat-footed, about how a certain lady named Eve started the fruit trouble in the
first free-grass pasture--'Over in Palestine, wasn't it?' says I, as easy and pat as
roping a one-year-old.
"That was how I acquired cordiality for the proximities of Miss Willella
Learight; and the disposition grew larger as time passed. She was stopping at
Pimienta Crossing for her health, which was very good, and for the climate,
which was forty per cent. hotter than Palestine. I rode over to see her once
every week for a while; and then I figured it out that if I doubled the number
of trips I would see her twice as often.
"One week I slipped in a third trip; and that's where the pancakes and the pinkeyed snoozer busted into the game.
"That evening, while I set on the counter with a peach and two damsons in my
mouth, I asked Uncle Emsley how Miss Willella was.
"'Why,' says Uncle Emsley, 'she's gone riding with Jackson Bird, the sheep
man from over at Mired Mule Canada.'
"I swallowed the peach seed and the two damson seeds. I guess somebody
held the counter by the bridle while I got off; and then I walked out straight

ahead till I butted against the mesquite where my roan was tied.
"'She's gone riding,' I whisper in my bronc's ear, 'with Birdstone Jack, the
hired mule from Sheep Man's Canada. Did you get that, old Leather-andGallops?'
"That bronc of mine wept, in his way. He'd been raised a cow pony and he
didn't care for snoozers.
"I went back and said to Uncle Emsley: 'Did you say a sheep man?'
"'I said a sheep man,' says Uncle Emsley again. 'You must have heard tell of
Jackson Bird. He's got eight sections of grazing and four thousand head of the
finest Merinos south of the Arctic Circle.'
"I went out and sat on the ground in the shade of the store and leaned against a
prickly pear. I sifted sand into my boots with unthinking hands while I
soliloquised a quantity about this bird with the Jackson plumage to his name.
"I never had believed in harming sheep men. I see one, one day, reading a
Latin grammar on hossback, and I never touched him! They never irritated me
like they do most cowmen. You wouldn't go to work now, and impair and
disfigure snoozers, would you, that eat on tables and wear little shoes and
speak to you on subjects? I had always let 'em pass, just as you would a jackrabbit; with a polite word and a guess about the weather, but no stopping to
swap canteens. I never thought it was worth while to be hostile with a snoozer.
And because I'd been lenient, and let 'em live, here was one going around
riding with Miss Willella Learight!
"An hour by sun they come loping back, and stopped at Uncle Emsley's gate.
The sheep person helped her off; and they stood throwing each other sentences
all sprightful and sagacious for a while. And then this feathered Jackson flies
up in his saddle and raises his little stewpot of a hat, and trots off in the
direction of his mutton ranch. By this time I had turned the sand out of my
boots and unpinned myself from the prickly pear; and by the time he gets half
a mile out of Pimienta, I singlefoots up beside him on my bronc.
"I said that snoozer was pink-eyed, but he wasn't. His seeing arrangement was
grey enough, but his eye-lashes was pink and his hair was sandy, and that gave
you the idea. Sheep man?--he wasn't more than a lamb man, anyhow--a little
thing with his neck involved in a yellow silk handkerchief, and shoes tied up
in bowknots.
"'Afternoon!' says I to him. 'You now ride with a equestrian who is commonly
called Dead-Moral-Certainty Judson, on account of the way I shoot. When I
want a stranger to know me I always introduce myself before the draw, for I
never did like to shake hands with ghosts.'
"'Ah,' says he, just like that--'Ah, I'm glad to know you, Mr. Judson. I'm

Jackson Bird, from over at Mired Mule Ranch.'
"Just then one of my eyes saw a roadrunner skipping down the hill with a
young tarantula in his bill, and the other eye noticed a rabbit-hawk sitting on a
dead limb in a water-elm. I popped over one after the other with my forty-five,
just to show him. 'Two out of three,' says I. 'Birds just naturally seem to draw
my fire wherever I go.'
"'Nice shooting,' says the sheep man, without a flutter. 'But don't you
sometimes ever miss the third shot? Elegant fine rain that was last week for
the young grass, Mr. Judson?' says he.
"'Willie,' says I, riding over close to his palfrey, 'your infatuated parents may
have denounced you by the name of Jackson, but you sure moulted into a
twittering Willie--let us slough off this here analysis of rain and the elements,
and get down to talk that is outside the vocabulary of parrots. That is a bad
habit you have got of riding with young ladies over at Pimienta. I've known
birds,' says I, 'to be served on toast for less than that. Miss Willella,' says I,
'don't ever want any nest made out of sheep's wool by a tomtit of the
Jacksonian branch of ornithology. Now, are you going to quit, or do you wish
for to gallop up against this Dead-Moral-Certainty attachment to my name,
which is good for two hyphens and at least one set of funeral obsequies?'
"Jackson Bird flushed up some, and then he laughed.
"'Why, Mr. Judson,' says he, 'you've got the wrong idea. I've called on Miss
Learight a few times; but not for the purpose you imagine. My object is purely
a gastronomical one.'
"I reached for my gun.
"'Any coyote,' says I, 'that would boast of dishonourable--'
"'Wait a minute,' says this Bird, 'till I explain. What would I do with a wife? If
you ever saw that ranch of mine! I do my own cooking and mending. Eating-that's all the pleasure I get out of sheep raising. Mr. Judson, did you ever taste
the pancakes that Miss Learight makes?'
"'Me? No,' I told him. 'I never was advised that she was up to any culinary
manoeuvres.'
"'They're golden sunshine,' says he, 'honey-browned by the ambrosial fires of
Epicurus. I'd give two years of my life to get the recipe for making them
pancakes. That's what I went to see Miss Learight for,' says Jackson Bird, 'but
I haven't been able to get it from her. It's an old recipe that's been in the family
for seventy-five years. They hand it down from one generation to another, but
they don't give it away to outsiders. If I could get that recipe, so I could make
them pancakes for myself on my ranch, I'd be a happy man,' says Bird.
"'Are you sure,' I says to him, 'that it ain't the hand that mixes the pancakes

that you're after?'
"'Sure,' says Jackson. 'Miss Learight is a mighty nice girl, but I can assure you
my intentions go no further than the gastro--' but he seen my hand going down
to my holster and he changed his similitude--'than the desire to procure a copy
of the pancake recipe,' he finishes.
"'You ain't such a bad little man,' says I, trying to be fair. 'I was thinking some
of making orphans of your sheep, but I'll let you fly away this time. But you
stick to pancakes,' says I, 'as close as the middle one of a stack; and don't go
and mistake sentiments for syrup, or there'll be singing at your ranch, and you
won't hear it.'
"'To convince you that I am sincere,' says the sheep man, 'I'll ask you to help
me. Miss Learight and you being closer friends, maybe she would do for you
what she wouldn't for me. If you will get me a copy of that pancake recipe, I
give you my word that I'll never call upon her again.'
"'That's fair,' I says, and I shook hands with Jackson Bird. 'I'll get it for you if I
can, and glad to oblige.' And he turned off down the big pear flat on the
Piedra, in the direction of Mired Mule; and I steered northwest for old Bill
Toomey's ranch.
"It was five days afterward when I got another chance to ride over to Pimienta.
Miss Willella and me passed a gratifying evening at Uncle Emsley's. She sang
some, and exasperated the piano quite a lot with quotations from the operas. I
gave imitations of a rattlesnake, and told her about Snaky McFee's new way of
skinning cows, and described the trip I made to Saint Louis once. We was
getting along in one another's estimations fine. Thinks I, if Jackson Bird can
now be persuaded to migrate, I win. I recollect his promise about the pancake
receipt, and I thinks I will persuade it from Miss Willella and give it to him;
and then if I catches Birdie off of Mired Mule again, I'll make him hop the
twig.
"So, along about ten o'clock, I put on a wheedling smile and says to Miss
Willella: 'Now, if there's anything I do like better than the sight of a red steer
on green grass it's the taste of a nice hot pancake smothered in sugar-house
molasses.'
"Miss Willella gives a little jump on the piano stool, and looked at me curious.
"'Yes,' says she, 'they're real nice. What did you say was the name of that street
in Saint Louis, Mr. Odom, where you lost your hat?'
"'Pancake Avenue,' says I, with a wink, to show her that I was on about the
family receipt, and couldn't be side-corralled off of the subject. 'Come, now,
Miss Willella,' I says; 'let's hear how you make 'em. Pancakes is just whirling
in my head like wagon wheels. Start her off, now--pound of flour, eight dozen

eggs, and so on. How does the catalogue of constituents run?'
"'Excuse me for a moment, please,' says Miss Willella, and she gives me a
quick kind of sideways look, and slides off the stool. She ambled out into the
other room, and directly Uncle Emsley comes in in his shirt sleeves, with a
pitcher of water. He turns around to get a glass on the table, and I see a fortyfive in his hip pocket. 'Great post- holes!' thinks I, 'but here's a family thinks a
heap of cooking receipts, protecting it with firearms. I've known outfits that
wouldn't do that much by a family feud.'
"'Drink this here down,' says Uncle Emsley, handing me the glass of water.
'You've rid too far to-day, Jud, and got yourself over-excited. Try to think
about something else now.'
"'Do you know how to make them pancakes, Uncle Emsley?' I asked.
"'Well, I'm not as apprised in the anatomy of them as some,' says Uncle
Emsley, 'but I reckon you take a sifter of plaster of Paris and a little dough and
saleratus and corn meal, and mix 'em with eggs and buttermilk as usual. Is old
Bill going to ship beeves to Kansas City again this spring, Jud?'
"That was all the pancake specifications I could get that night. I didn't wonder
that Jackson Bird found it uphill work. So I dropped the subject and talked
with Uncle Emsley for a while about hollow-horn and cyclones. And then
Miss Willella came and said 'Good-night,' and I hit the breeze for the ranch.
"About a week afterward I met Jackson Bird riding out of Pimienta as I rode
in, and we stopped on the road for a few frivolous remarks.
"'Got the bill of particulars for them flapjacks yet?' I asked him.
"'Well, no,' says Jackson. 'I don't seem to have any success in getting hold of
it. Did you try?'
"'I did,' says I, 'and 'twas like trying to dig a prairie dog out of his hole with a
peanut hull. That pancake receipt must be a jookalorum, the way they hold on
to it.'
"'I'm most ready to give it up,' says Jackson, so discouraged in his
pronunciations that I felt sorry for him; 'but I did want to know how to make
them pancakes to eat on my lonely ranch,' says he. 'I lie awake at nights
thinking how good they are.'
"'You keep on trying for it,' I tells him, 'and I'll do the same. One of us is
bound to get a rope over its horns before long. Well, so- long, Jacksy.'
"You see, by this time we were on the peacefullest of terms. When I saw that
he wasn't after Miss Willella, I had more endurable contemplations of that
sandy-haired snoozer. In order to help out the ambitions of his appetite I kept
on trying to get that receipt from Miss Willella. But every time I would say

'pancakes' she would get sort of remote and fidgety about the eye, and try to
change the subject. If I held her to it she would slide out and round up Uncle
Emsley with his pitcher of water and hip-pocket howitzer.
"One day I galloped over to the store with a fine bunch of blue verbenas that I
cut out of a herd of wild flowers over on Poisoned Dog Prairie. Uncle Emsley
looked at 'em with one eye shut and says:
"'Haven't ye heard the news?'
"'Cattle up?' I asks.
"'Willella and Jackson Bird was married in Palestine yesterday,' says he. 'Just
got a letter this morning.'
"I dropped them flowers in a cracker-barrel, and let the news trickle in my ears
and down toward my upper left-hand shirt pocket until it got to my feet.
"'Would you mind saying that over again once more, Uncle Emsley?' says I.
'Maybe my hearing has got wrong, and you only said that prime heifers was
4.80 on the hoof, or something like that.'
"'Married yesterday,' says Uncle Emsley, 'and gone to Waco and Niagara Falls
on a wedding tour. Why, didn't you see none of the signs all along? Jackson
Bird has been courting Willella ever since that day he took her out riding.'
"'Then,' says I, in a kind of yell, 'what was all this zizzaparoola he gives me
about pancakes? Tell me /that/.'
"When I said 'pancakes' Uncle Emsley sort of dodged and stepped back.
"'Somebody's been dealing me pancakes from the bottom of the deck,' I says,
'and I'll find out. I believe you know. Talk up,' says I, 'or we'll mix a panful of
batter right here.'
"I slid over the counter after Uncle Emsley. He grabbed at his gun, but it was
in a drawer, and he missed it two inches. I got him by the front of his shirt and
shoved him in a corner.
"'Talk pancakes,' says I, 'or be made into one. Does Miss Willella make 'em?'
"'She never made one in her life and I never saw one,' says Uncle Emsley,
soothing. 'Calm down now, Jud--calm down. You've got excited, and that
wound in your head is contaminating your sense of intelligence. Try not to
think about pancakes.'
"'Uncle Emsley,' says I, 'I'm not wounded in the head except so far as my
natural cognitive instincts run to runts. Jackson Bird told me he was calling on
Miss Willella for the purpose of finding out her system of producing pancakes,
and he asked me to help him get the bill of lading of the ingredients. I done so,
with the results as you see. Have I been sodded down with Johnson grass by a
pink-eyed snoozer, or what?'

"'Slack up your grip in my dress shirt,' says Uncle Emsley, 'and I'll tell you.
Yes, it looks like Jackson Bird has gone and humbugged you some. The day
after he went riding with Willella he came back and told me and her to watch
out for you whenever you got to talking about pancakes. He said you was in
camp once where they was cooking flapjacks, and one of the fellows cut you
over the head with a frying pan. Jackson said that whenever you got overhot or
excited that wound hurt you and made you kind of crazy, and you went raving
about pancakes. He told us to just get you worked off of the subject and
soothed down, and you wouldn't be dangerous. So, me and Willella done the
best by you we knew how. Well, well,' says Uncle Emsley, 'that Jackson Bird
is sure a seldom kind of a snoozer.'"
During the progress of Jud's story he had been slowly but deftly combining
certain portions of the contents of his sacks and cans. Toward the close of it he
set before me the finished product--a pair of red-hot, rich-hued pancakes on a
tin plate. From some secret hoarding he also brought a lump of excellent butter
and a bottle of golden syrup.
"How long ago did these things happen?" I asked him.
"Three years," said Jud. "They're living on the Mired Mule Ranch now. But I
haven't seen either of 'em since. They say Jackson Bird was fixing his ranch up
fine with rocking chairs and window curtains all the time he was putting me
up the pancake tree. Oh, I got over it after a while. But the boys kept the racket
up."
"Did you make these cakes by the famous recipe?" I asked.
"Didn't I tell you there wasn't no receipt?" said Jud. "The boys hollered
pancakes till they got pancake hungry, and I cut this recipe out of a newspaper.
How does the truck taste?"
"They're delicious," I answered. "Why don't you have some, too, Jud?"
I was sure I heard a sigh.
"Me?" said Jud. "I don't ever eat 'em."

VI
SEATS OF THE HAUGHTY
Golden by day and silver by night, a new trail now leads to us across the
Indian Ocean. Dusky kings and princes have found our Bombay of the West;
and few be their trails that do not lead down to Broadway on their journey for
to admire and for to see.

If chance should ever lead you near a hotel that transiently shelters some one
of these splendid touring grandees, I counsel you to seek Lucullus Polk among
the republican tuft-hunters that besiege its entrances. He will be there. You
will know him by his red, alert, Wellington-nosed face, by his manner of
nervous caution mingled with determination, by his assumed promoter's or
broker's air of busy impatience, and by his bright-red necktie, gallantly
redressing the wrongs of his maltreated blue serge suit, like a battle standard
still waving above a lost cause. I found him profitable; and so may you. When
you do look for him, look among the light-horse troop of Bedouins that
besiege the picket-line of the travelling potentate's guards and secretaries-among the wild-eyed genii of Arabian Afternoons that gather to make
astounding and egregrious demands upon the prince's coffers.
I first saw Mr. Polk coming down the steps of the hotel at which sojourned His
Highness the Gaekwar of Baroda, most enlightened of the Mahratta princes,
who, of late, ate bread and salt in our Metropolis of the Occident.
Lucullus moved rapidly, as though propelled by some potent moral force that
imminently threatened to become physical. Behind him closely followed the
impetus--a hotel detective, if ever white Alpine hat, hawk's nose, implacable
watch chain, and loud refinement of manner spoke the truth. A brace of
uniformed porters at his heels preserved the smooth decorum of the hotel,
repudiating by their air of disengagement any suspicion that they formed a
reserve squad of ejectment.
Safe on the sidewalk, Lucullus Polk turned and shook a freckled fist at the
caravansary. And, to my joy, he began to breathe deep invective in strange
words:
"Rides in howdays, does he?" he cried loudly and sneeringly. "Rides on
elephants in howdahs and calls himself a prince! Kings--yah! Comes over here
and talks horse till you would think he was a president; and then goes home
and rides in a private dining-room strapped onto an elephant. Well, well,
well!"
The ejecting committee quietly retired. The scorner of princes turned to me
and snapped his fingers.
"What do you think of that?" he shouted derisively. "The Gaekwar of Baroda
rides in an elephant in a howdah! And there's old Bikram Shamsher Jang
scorching up and down the pig-paths of Khatmandu on a motor-cycle.
Wouldn't that maharajah you? And the Shah of Persia, that ought to have been
Muley-on-the-spot for at least three, he's got the palanquin habit. And that
funny-hat prince from Korea--wouldn't you think he could afford to amble
around on a milk-white palfrey once in a dynasty or two? Nothing doing! His
idea of a Balaklava charge is to tuck his skirts under him and do his mile in six

days over the hog- wallows of Seoul in a bull-cart. That's the kind of visiting
potentates that come to this country now. It's a hard deal, friend."
I murmured a few words of sympathy. But it was uncomprehending, for I did
not know his grievance against the rulers who flash, meteor-like, now and then
upon our shores.
"The last one I sold," continued the displeased one, "was to that three-horsetailed Turkish pasha that came over a year ago. Five hundred dollars he paid
for it, easy. I says to his executioner or secretary--he was a kind of a Jew or a
Chinaman--'His Turkey Gibbets is fond of horses, then?'
"'Him?' says the secretary. 'Well, no. He's got a big, fat wife in the harem
named Bad Dora that he don't like. I believe he intends to saddle her up and
ride her up and down the board-walk in the Bulbul Gardens a few times every
day. You haven't got a pair of extra-long spurs you could throw in on the deal,
have you?' Yes, sir; there's mighty few real rough-riders among the royal
sports these days."
As soon as Lucullus Polk got cool enough I picked him up, and with no
greater effort than you would employ in persuading a drowning man to clutch
a straw, I inveigled him into accompanying me to a cool corner in a dim cafe.
And it came to pass that man-servants set before us brewage; and Lucullus
Polk spake unto me, relating the wherefores of his beleaguering the
antechambers of the princes of the earth.
"Did you ever hear of the S.A. & A.P. Railroad in Texas? Well, that don't stand
for Samaritan Actor's Aid Philanthropy. I was down that way managing a
summer bunch of the gum and syntax-chewers that play the Idlewild Parks in
the Western hamlets. Of course, we went to pieces when the soubrette ran
away with a prominent barber of Beeville. I don't know what became of the
rest of the company. I believe there were some salaries due; and the last I saw
of the troupe was when I told them that forty-three cents was all the treasury
contained. I say I never saw any of them after that; but I heard them for about
twenty minutes. I didn't have time to look back. But after dark I came out of
the woods and struck the S.A. & A.P. agent for means of transportation. He at
once extended to me the courtesies of the entire railroad, kindly warning me,
however, not to get aboard any of the rolling stock.
"About ten the next morning I steps off the ties into a village that calls itself
Atascosa City. I bought a thirty-cent breakfast and a ten-cent cigar, and stood
on the Main Street jingling the three pennies in my pocket--dead broke. A man
in Texas with only three cents in his pocket is no better off than a man that has
no money and owes two cents.
"One of luck's favourite tricks is to soak a man for his last dollar so quick that
he don't have time to look it. There I was in a swell St. Louis tailor-made,

blue-and-green plaid suit, and an eighteen- carat sulphate-of-copper scarf-pin,
with no hope in sight except the two great Texas industries, the cotton fields
and grading new railroads. I never picked cotton, and I never cottoned to a
pick, so the outlook had ultramarine edges.
"All of a sudden, while I was standing on the edge of the wooden sidewalk,
down out of the sky falls two fine gold watches in the middle of the street.
One hits a chunk of mud and sticks. The other falls hard and flies open,
making a fine drizzle of little springs and screws and wheels. I looks up for a
balloon or an airship; but not seeing any, I steps off the sidewalk to
investigate.
"But I hear a couple of yells and see two men running up the street in leather
overalls and high-heeled boots and cartwheel hats. One man is six or eight feet
high, with open-plumbed joints and a heartbroken cast of countenance. He
picks up the watch that has stuck in the mud. The other man, who is little, with
pink hair and white eyes, goes for the empty case, and says, 'I win.' Then the
elevated pessimist goes down under his leather leg-holsters and hands a
handful of twenty- dollar gold pieces to his albino friend. I don't know how
much money it was; it looked as big as an earthquake-relief fund to me.
"'I'll have this here case filled up with works,' says Shorty, 'and throw you
again for five hundred.'
"'I'm your company,' says the high man. 'I'll meet you at the Smoked Dog
Saloon an hour from now.'
"The little man hustles away with a kind of Swiss movement toward a jewelry
store. The heartbroken person stoops over and takes a telescopic view of my
haberdashery.
"'Them's a mighty slick outfit of habiliments you have got on, Mr. Man,' says
he. 'I'll bet a hoss you never acquired the right, title, and interest in and to them
clothes in Atascosa City.'
"'Why, no,' says I, being ready enough to exchange personalities with this
moneyed monument of melancholy. 'I had this suit tailored from a special line
of coatericks, vestures, and pantings in St. Louis. Would you mind putting me
sane,' says I, 'on this watch-throwing contest? I've been used to seeing timepieces treated with more politeness and esteem--except women's watches, of
course, which by nature they abuse by cracking walnuts with 'em and having
'em taken showing in tintype pictures.'
"'Me and George,' he explains, 'are up from the ranch, having a spell of fun.
Up to last month we owned four sections of watered grazing down on the San
Miguel. But along comes one of these oil prospectors and begins to bore. He
strikes a gusher that flows out twenty thousand --or maybe it was twenty
million--barrels of oil a day. And me and George gets one hundred and fifty

thousand dollars--seventy-five thousand dollars apiece--for the land. So now
and then we saddles up and hits the breeze for Atascosa City for a few days of
excitement and damage. Here's a little bunch of the /dinero/ that I drawed out
of the bank this morning,' says he, and shows a roll of twenties and fifties as
big around as a sleeping-car pillow. The yellowbacks glowed like a sunset on
the gable end of John D.'s barn. My knees got weak, and I sat down on the
edge of the board sidewalk.
"'You must have knocked around a right smart,' goes on this oil Grease-us. 'I
shouldn't be surprised if you have saw towns more livelier than what Atascosa
City is. Sometimes it seems to me that there ought to be some more ways of
having a good time than there is here, 'specially when you've got plenty of
money and don't mind spending it.'
"Then this Mother Cary's chick of the desert sits down by me and we hold a
conversationfest. It seems that he was money-poor. He'd lived in ranch camps
all his life; and he confessed to me that his supreme idea of luxury was to ride
into camp, tired out from a round-up, eat a peck of Mexican beans, hobble his
brains with a pint of raw whisky, and go to sleep with his boots for a pillow.
When this barge-load of unexpected money came to him and his pink but
perky partner, George, and they hied themselves to this clump of outhouses
called Atascosa City, you know what happened to them. They had money to
buy anything they wanted; but they didn't know what to want. Their ideas of
spendthriftiness were limited to three--whisky, saddles, and gold watches. If
there was anything else in the world to throw away fortunes on, they had never
heard about it. So, when they wanted to have a hot time, they'd ride into town
and get a city directory and stand in front of the principal saloon and call up
the population alphabetically for free drinks. Then they would order three or
four new California saddles from the storekeeper, and play crack-loo on the
sidewalk with twenty-dollar gold pieces. Betting who could throw his gold
watch the farthest was an inspiration of George's; but even that was getting to
be monotonous.
"Was I on to the opportunity? Listen.
"In thirty minutes I had dashed off a word picture of metropolitan joys that
made life in Atascosa City look as dull as a trip to Coney Island with your own
wife. In ten minutes more we shook hands on an agreement that I was to act as
his guide, interpreter and friend in and to the aforesaid wassail and amenity.
And Solomon Mills, which was his name, was to pay all expenses for a month.
At the end of that time, if I had made good as director-general of the rowdy
life, he was to pay me one thousand dollars. And then, to clinch the bargain,
we called the roll of Atascosa City and put all of its citizens except the ladies
and minors under the table, except one man named Horace Westervelt St.
Clair. Just for that we bought a couple of hatfuls of cheap silver watches and

egged him out of town with 'em. We wound up by dragging the harness-maker
out of bed and setting him to work on three new saddles; and then we went to
sleep across the railroad track at the depot, just to annoy the S.A. & A.P. Think
of having seventy- five thousand dollars and trying to avoid the disgrace of
dying rich in a town like that!
"The next day George, who was married or something, started back to the
ranch. Me and Solly, as I now called him, prepared to shake off our moth balls
and wing our way against the arc-lights of the joyous and tuneful East.
"'No way-stops,' says I to Solly, 'except long enough to get you barbered and
haberdashed. This is no Texas feet shampetter,' says I, 'where you eat chiliconcarne-con-huevos and then holler "Whoopee!" across the plaza. We're now
going against the real high life. We're going to mingle with the set that carries
a Spitz, wears spats, and hits the ground in high spots.'
"Solly puts six thousand dollars in century bills in one pocket of his brown
ducks, and bills of lading for ten thousand dollars on Eastern banks in another.
Then I resume diplomatic relations with the S.A. & A.P., and we hike in a
northwesterly direction on our circuitous route to the spice gardens of the
Yankee Orient.
"We stopped in San Antonio long enough for Solly to buy some clothes, and
eight rounds of drinks for the guests and employees of the Menger Hotel, and
order four Mexican saddles with silver trimmings and white Angora /suaderos/
to be shipped down to the ranch. From there we made a big jump to St. Louis.
We got there in time for dinner; and I put our thumb-prints on the register of
the most expensive hotel in the city.
"'Now,' says I to Solly, with a wink at myself, 'here's the first dinner-station
we've struck where we can get a real good plate of beans.' And while he was
up in his room trying to draw water out of the gas-pipe, I got one finger in the
buttonhole of the head waiter's Tuxedo, drew him apart, inserted a two-dollar
bill, and closed him up again.
"'Frankoyse,' says I, 'I have a pal here for dinner that's been subsisting for
years on cereals and short stogies. You see the chef and order a dinner for us
such as you serve to Dave Francis and the general passenger agent of the Iron
Mountain when they eat here. We've got more than Bernhardt's tent full of
money; and we want the nose- bags crammed with all the Chief Deveries /de
cuisine/. Object is no expense. Now, show us.'
"At six o'clock me and Solly sat down to dinner. Spread! There's nothing been
seen like it since the Cambon snack. It was all served at once. The chef called
it /dinnay a la poker/. It's a famous thing among the gormands of the West.
The dinner comes in threes of a kind. There was guinea-fowls, guinea-pigs,
and Guinness's stout; roast veal, mock turtle soup, and chicken pate; shad-roe,

caviar, and tapioca; canvas-back duck, canvas-back ham, and cotton-tail
rabbit; Philadelphia capon, fried snails, and sloe-gin--and so on, in threes. The
idea was that you eat nearly all you can of them, and then the waiter takes
away the discard and gives you pears to fill on.
"I was sure Solly would be tickled to death with these hands, after the bobtail
flushes he'd been eating on the ranch; and I was a little anxious that he should,
for I didn't remember his having honoured my efforts with a smile since we
left Atascosa City.
"We were in the main dining-room, and there was a fine-dressed crowd there,
all talking loud and enjoyable about the two St. Louis topics, the water supply
and the colour line. They mix the two subjects so fast that strangers often think
they are discussing water-colours; and that has given the old town something
of a rep as an art centre. And over in the corner was a fine brass band playing;
and now, thinks I, Solly will become conscious of the spiritual oats of life
nourishing and exhilarating his system. But /nong, mong frang/.
"He gazed across the table at me. There was four square yards of it, looking
like the path of a cyclone that has wandered through a stock- yard, a poultryfarm, a vegetable-garden, and an Irish linen mill. Solly gets up and comes
around to me.
"'Luke,' says he, 'I'm pretty hungry after our ride. I thought you said they had
some beans here. I'm going out and get something I can eat. You can stay and
monkey with this artificial layout of grub if you want to.'
"'Wait a minute,' says I.
"I called the waiter, and slapped 'S. Mills' on the back of the check for thirteen
dollars and fifty cents.
"'What do you mean,' says I, 'by serving gentlemen with a lot of truck only
suitable for deck-hands on a Mississippi steamboat? We're going out to get
something decent to eat.'
"I walked up the street with the unhappy plainsman. He saw a saddle- shop
open, and some of the sadness faded from his eyes. We went in, and he
ordered and paid for two more saddles--one with a solid silver horn and nails
and ornaments and a six-inch border of rhinestones and imitation rubies
around the flaps. The other one had to have a gold- mounted horn, quadrupleplated stirrups, and the leather inlaid with silver beadwork wherever it would
stand it. Eleven hundred dollars the two cost him.
"Then he goes out and heads toward the river, following his nose. In a little
side street, where there was no street and no sidewalks and no houses, he finds
what he is looking for. We go into a shanty and sit on high stools among
stevedores and boatmen, and eat beans with tin spoons. Yes, sir, beans--beans

boiled with salt pork.
"'I kind of thought we'd strike some over this way,' says Solly.
"'Delightful,' says I, 'That stylish hotel grub may appeal to some; but for me,
give me the husky /table d'goat.'
"When we had succumbed to the beans I leads him out of the tarpaulin- steam
under a lamp post and pulls out a daily paper with the amusement column
folded out.
"'But now, what ho for a merry round of pleasure,' says I. 'Here's one of Hall
Caine's shows, and a stock-yard company in "Hamlet," and skating at the
Hollowhorn Rink, and Sarah Bernhardt, and the Shapely Syrens Burlesque
Company. I should think, now, that the Shapely--'
"But what does this healthy, wealthy, and wise man do but reach his arms up
to the second-story windows and gape noisily.
"'Reckon I'll be going to bed,' says he; 'it's about my time. St. Louis is a kind
of quiet place, ain't it?'
"'Oh, yes,' says I; 'ever since the railroads ran in here the town's been
practically ruined. And the building-and-loan associations and the fair have
about killed it. Guess we might as well go to bed. Wait till you see Chicago,
though. Shall we get tickets for the Big Breeze to-morrow?'
"'Mought as well,' says Solly. 'I reckon all these towns are about alike.'
"Well, maybe the wise cicerone and personal conductor didn't fall hard in
Chicago! Loolooville-on-the-Lake is supposed to have one or two things in it
calculated to keep the rural visitor awake after the curfew rings. But not for
the grass-fed man of the pampas! I tried him with theatres, rides in
automobiles, sails on the lake, champagne suppers, and all those little
inventions that hold the simple life in check; but in vain. Solly grew sadder
day by day. And I got fearful about my salary, and knew I must play my trump
card. So I mentioned New York to him, and informed him that these Western
towns were no more than gateways to the great walled city of the whirling
dervishes.
"After I bought the tickets I missed Solly. I knew his habits by then; so in a
couple of hours I found him in a saddle-shop. They had some new ideas there
in the way of trees and girths that had strayed down from the Canadian
mounted police; and Solly was so interested that he almost looked reconciled
to live. He invested about nine hundred dollars in there.
"At the depot I telegraphed a cigar-store man I knew in New York to meet me
at the Twenty-third Street ferry with a list of all the saddle-stores in the city. I
wanted to know where to look for Solly when he got lost.

"Now I'll tell you what happened in New York. I says to myself: 'Friend
Heherezade, you want to get busy and make Bagdad look pretty to the sad
sultan of the sour countenance, or it'll be the bowstring for yours.' But I never
had any doubt I could do it.
"I began with him like you'd feed a starving man. I showed him the horse-cars
on Broadway and the Staten Island ferry-boats. And then I piled up the
sensations on him, but always keeping a lot of warmer ones up my sleeve.
"At the end of the third day he looked like a composite picture of five
thousand orphans too late to catch a picnic steamboat, and I was wilting down
a collar every two hours wondering how I could please him and whether I was
going to get my thou. He went to sleep looking at the Brooklyn Bridge; he
disregarded the sky-scrapers above the third story; it took three ushers to wake
him up at the liveliest vaudeville in town.
"Once I thought I had him. I nailed a pair of cuffs on him one morning before
he was awake; and I dragged him that evening to the palm-cage of one of the
biggest hotels in the city--to see the Johnnies and the Alice-sit-by-the-hours.
They were out in numerous quantities, with the fat of the land showing in their
clothes. While we were looking them over, Solly divested himself of a fearful,
rusty kind of laugh--like moving a folding bed with one roller broken. It was
his first in two weeks, and it gave me hope.
"'Right you are,' says I. 'They're a funny lot of post-cards, aren't they?'
"'Oh, I wasn't thinking of them dudes and culls on the hoof,' says he. 'I was
thinking of the time me and George put sheep-dip in Horsehead Johnson's
whisky. I wish I was back in Atascosa City,' says he.
"I felt a cold chill run down my back. 'Me to play and mate in one move,' says
I to myself.
"I made Solly promise to stay in the cafe for half an hour and I hiked out in a
cab to Lolabelle Delatour's flat on Forty-third Street. I knew her well. She was
a chorus-girl in a Broadway musical comedy.
"'Jane,' says I when I found her, 'I've got a friend from Texas here. He's all
right, but--well, he carries weight. I'd like to give him a little whirl after the
show this evening--bubbles, you know, and a buzz out to a casino for the
whitebait and pickled walnuts. Is it a go?'
"'Can he sing?' asks Lolabelle.
"'You know,' says I, 'that I wouldn't take him away from home unless his notes
were good. He's got pots of money--bean-pots full of it.'
"'Bring him around after the second act,' says Lolabelle, 'and I'll examine his
credentials and securities.'

"So about ten o'clock that evening I led Solly to Miss Delatour's dressingroom, and her maid let us in. In ten minutes in comes Lolabelle, fresh from the
stage, looking stunning in the costume she wears when she steps from the
ranks of the lady grenadiers and says to the king, 'Welcome to our May-day
revels.' And you can bet it wasn't the way she spoke the lines that got her the
part.
"As soon as Solly saw her he got up and walked straight out through the stage
entrance into the street. I followed him. Lolabelle wasn't paying my salary. I
wondered whether anybody was.
"'Luke,' says Solly, outside, 'that was an awful mistake. We must have got into
the lady's private room. I hope I'm gentleman enough to do anything possible
in the way of apologies. Do you reckon she'd ever forgive us?'
"'She may forget it,' says I. 'Of course it was a mistake. Let's go find some
beans.'
"That's the way it went. But pretty soon afterward Solly failed to show up at
dinner-time for several days. I cornered him. He confessed that he had found a
restaurant on Third Avenue where they cooked beans in Texas style. I made
him take me there. The minute I set foot inside the door I threw up my hands.
"There was a young woman at the desk, and Solly introduced me to her. And
then we sat down and had beans.
"Yes, sir, sitting at the desk was the kind of a young woman that can catch any
man in the world as easy as lifting a finger. There's a way of doing it. She
knew. I saw her working it. She was healthy-looking and plain dressed. She
had her hair drawn back from her forehead and face--no curls or frizzes; that's
the way she looked. Now I'll tell you the way they work the game; it's simple.
When she wants a man, she manages it so that every time he looks at her he
finds her looking at him. That's all.
"The next evening Solly was to go to Coney Island with me at seven. At eight
o'clock he hadn't showed up. I went out and found a cab. I felt sure there was
something wrong.
"'Drive to the Back Home Restaurant on Third Avenue,' says I. 'And if I don't
find what I want there, take in these saddle-shops.' I handed him the list.
"'Boss,' says the cabby, 'I et a steak in that restaurant once. If you're real
hungry, I advise you to try the saddle-shops first.'
"'I'm a detective,' says I, 'and I don't eat. Hurry up!'
"As soon as I got to the restaurant I felt in the lines of my palms that I should
beware of a tall, red, damfool man, and I was going to lose a sum of money.
"Solly wasn't there. Neither was the smooth-haired lady.

"I waited; and in an hour they came in a cab and got out, hand in hand. I asked
Solly to step around the corner for a few words. He was grinning clear across
his face; but I had not administered the grin.
"'She's the greatest that ever sniffed the breeze,' says he.
"'Congrats,' says I. 'I'd like to have my thousand now, if you please.'
"'Well, Luke,' says he, 'I don't know that I've had such a skyhoodlin' fine time
under your tutelage and dispensation. But I'll do the best I can for you--I'll do
the best I can,' he repeats. 'Me and Miss Skinner was married an hour ago.
We're leaving for Texas in the morning.'
"'Great!' says I. 'Consider yourself covered with rice and Congress gaiters. But
don't let's tie so many satin bows on our business relations that we lose sight of
'em. How about my honorarium?'
"'Missis Mills,' says he, 'has taken possession of my money and papers except
six bits. I told her what I'd agreed to give you; but she says it's an irreligious
and illegal contract, and she won't pay a cent of it. But I ain't going to see you
treated unfair,' says he. 'I've got eighty-seven saddles on the ranch what I've
bought on this trip; and when I get back I'm going to pick out the best six in
the lot and send 'em to you.'"
"And did he?" I asked, when Lucullus ceased talking.
"He did. And they are fit for kings to ride on. The six he sent me must have
cost him three thousand dollars. But where is the market for 'em? Who would
buy one except one of these rajahs and princes of Asia and Africa? I've got 'em
all on the list. I know every tan royal dub and smoked princerino from
Mindanao to the Caspian Sea."
"It's a long time between customers," I ventured.
"They're coming faster," said Polk. "Nowadays, when one of the murdering
mutts gets civilised enough to abolish suttee and quit using his whiskers for a
napkin, he calls himself the Roosevelt of the East, and comes over to
investigate our Chautauquas and cocktails. I'll place 'em all yet. Now look
here."
From an inside pocket he drew a tightly folded newspaper with much- worn
edges, and indicated a paragraph.
"Read that," said the saddler to royalty. The paragraph ran thus:
His Highness Seyyid Feysal bin Turkee, Imam of Muskat, is one of
the most progressive and enlightened rulers of the Old World. His
stables contain more than a thousand horses of the purest Persian
breeds. It is said that this powerful prince contemplates a visit

to the United States at an early date.
"There!" said Mr. Polk triumphantly. "My best saddle is as good as sold--the
one with turquoises set in the rim of the cantle. Have you three dollars that you
could loan me for a short time?"
It happened that I had; and I did.
If this should meet the eye of the Imam of Muskat, may it quicken his whim to
visit the land of the free! Otherwise I fear that I shall be longer than a short
time separated from my dollars three.

VII
HYGEIA AT THE SOLITO
If you are knowing in the chronicles of the ring you will recall to mind an
event in the early 'nineties when, for a minute and sundry odd seconds, a
champion and a "would-be" faced each other on the alien side of an
international river. So brief a conflict had rarely imposed upon the fair promise
of true sport. The reporters made what they could of it, but, divested of
padding, the action was sadly fugacious. The champion merely smote his
victim, turned his back upon him, remarking, "I know what I done to dat stiff,"
and extended an arm like a ship's mast for his glove to be removed.
Which accounts for a trainload of extremely disgusted gentlemen in an uproar
of fancy vests and neck-wear being spilled from their pullmans in San Antonio
in the early morning following the fight. Which also partly accounts for the
unhappy predicament in which "Cricket" McGuire found himself as he
tumbled from his car and sat upon the depot platform, torn by a spasm of that
hollow, racking cough so familiar to San Antonian ears. At that time, in the
uncertain light of dawn, that way passed Curtis Raidler, the Nueces County
cattleman--may his shadow never measure under six foot two.
The cattleman, out this early to catch the south-bound for his ranch station,
stopped at the side of the distressed patron of sport, and spoke in the kindly
drawl of his ilk and region, "Got it pretty bad, bud?"
"Cricket" McGuire, ex-feather-weight prizefighter, tout, jockey, follower of
the "ponies," all-round sport, and manipulator of the gum balls and walnut
shells, looked up pugnaciously at the imputation cast by "bud."
"G'wan," he rasped, "telegraph pole. I didn't ring for yer."
Another paroxysm wrung him, and he leaned limply against a convenient
baggage truck. Raidler waited patiently, glancing around at the white hats,
short overcoats, and big cigars thronging the platform. "You're from the No'th,

ain't you, bud?" he asked when the other was partially recovered. "Come down
to see the fight?"
"Fight!" snapped McGuire. "Puss-in-the-corner! 'Twas a hypodermic injection.
Handed him just one like a squirt of dope, and he's asleep, and no tanbark
needed in front of his residence. Fight!" He rattled a bit, coughed, and went
on, hardly addressing the cattleman, but rather for the relief of voicing his
troubles. "No more dead sure t'ings for me. But Rus Sage himself would have
snatched at it. Five to one dat de boy from Cork wouldn't stay t'ree rounds is
what I invested in. Put my last cent on, and could already smell the sawdust in
dat all-night joint of Jimmy Delaney's on T'irty-seventh Street I was goin' to
buy. And den--say, telegraph pole, what a gazaboo a guy is to put his whole
roll on one turn of the gaboozlum!"
"You're plenty right," said the big cattleman; "more 'specially when you lose.
Son, you get up and light out for a hotel. You got a mighty bad cough. Had it
long?"
"Lungs," said McGuire comprehensively. "I got it. The croaker says I'll come
to time for six months longer--maybe a year if I hold my gait. I wanted to
settle down and take care of myself. Dat's why I speculated on dat five to one
perhaps. I had a t'ousand iron dollars saved up. If I winned I was goin' to buy
Delaney's cafe. Who'd a t'ought dat stiff would take a nap in de foist round-say?"
"It's a hard deal," commented Raidler, looking down at the diminutive form of
McGuire crumpled against the truck. "But you go to a hotel and rest. There's
the Menger and the Maverick, and--"
"And the Fi'th Av'noo, and the Waldorf-Astoria," mimicked McGuire. "Told
you I went broke. I'm on de bum proper. I've got one dime left. Maybe a trip to
Europe or a sail in me private yacht would fix me up-- pa-per!"
He flung his dime at a newsboy, got his /Express/, propped his back against
the truck, and was at once rapt in the account of his Waterloo, as expanded by
the ingenious press.
Curtis Raidler interrogated an enormous gold watch, and laid his hand on
McGuire's shoulder.
"Come on, bud," he said. "We got three minutes to catch the train."
Sarcasm seemed to be McGuire's vein.
"You ain't seen me cash in any chips or call a turn since I told you I was broke,
a minute ago, have you? Friend, chase yourself away."
"You're going down to my ranch," said the cattleman, "and stay till you get
well. Six months'll fix you good as new." He lifted McGuire with one hand,
and half-dragged him in the direction of the train.

"What about the money?" said McGuire, struggling weakly to escape.
"Money for what?" asked Raidler, puzzled. They eyed each other, not
understanding, for they touched only as at the gear of bevelled cog- wheels--at
right angles, and moving upon different axes.
Passengers on the south-bound saw them seated together, and wondered at the
conflux of two such antipodes. McGuire was five feet one, with a countenance
belonging to either Yokohama or Dublin. Bright-beady of eye, bony of cheek
and jaw, scarred, toughened, broken and reknit, indestructible, grisly,
gladiatorial as a hornet, he was a type neither new nor unfamiliar. Raidler was
the product of a different soil. Six feet two in height, miles broad, and no
deeper than a crystal brook, he represented the union of the West and South.
Few accurate pictures of his kind have been made, for art galleries are so small
and the mutoscope is as yet unknown in Texas. After all, the only possible
medium of portrayal of Raidler's kind would be the fresco--something high
and simple and cool and unframed.
They were rolling southward on the International. The timber was huddling
into little, dense green motts at rare distances before the inundation of the
downright, vert prairies. This was the land of the ranches; the domain of the
kings of the kine.
McGuire sat, collapsed into his corner of the seat, receiving with acid
suspicion the conversation of the cattleman. What was the "game" of this big
"geezer" who was carrying him off? Altruism would have been McGuire's last
guess. "He ain't no farmer," thought the captive, "and he ain't no con man, for
sure. W'at's his lay? You trail in, Cricket, and see how many cards he draws.
You're up against it, anyhow. You got a nickel and gallopin' consumption, and
you better lay low. Lay low and see w'at's his game."
At Rincon, a hundred miles from San Antonio, they left the train for a
buckboard which was waiting there for Raidler. In this they travelled the thirty
miles between the station and their destination. If anything could, this drive
should have stirred the acrimonious McGuire to a sense of his ransom. They
sped upon velvety wheels across an exhilarant savanna. The pair of Spanish
ponies struck a nimble, tireless trot, which gait they occasionally relieved by a
wild, untrammelled gallop. The air was wine and seltzer, perfumed, as they
absorbed it, with the delicate redolence of prairie flowers. The road perished,
and the buckboard swam the uncharted billows of the grass itself, steered by
the practised hand of Raidler, to whom each tiny distant mott of trees was a
signboard, each convolution of the low hills a voucher of course and distance.
But McGuire reclined upon his spine, seeing nothing but a desert, and
receiving the cattleman's advances with sullen distrust. "W'at's he up to?" was
the burden of his thoughts; "w'at kind of a gold brick has the big guy got to
sell?" McGuire was only applying the measure of the streets he had walked to

a range bounded by the horizon and the fourth dimension.
A week before, while riding the prairies, Raidler had come upon a sick and
weakling calf deserted and bawling. Without dismounting he had reached and
slung the distressed bossy across his saddle, and dropped it at the ranch for the
boys to attend to. It was impossible for McGuire to know or comprehend that,
in the eyes of the cattleman, his case and that of the calf were identical in
interest and demand upon his assistance. A creature was ill and helpless; he
had the power to render aid--these were the only postulates required for the
cattleman to act. They formed his system of logic and the most of his creed.
McGuire was the seventh invalid whom Raidler had picked up thus casually in
San Antonio, where so many thousand go for the ozone that is said to linger
about its contracted streets. Five of them had been guests of Solito Ranch until
they had been able to leave, cured or better, and exhausting the vocabulary of
tearful gratitude. One came too late, but rested very comfortably, at last, under
a ratama tree in the garden.
So, then, it was no surprise to the ranchhold when the buckboard spun to the
door, and Raidler took up his debile /protege/ like a handful of rags and set
him down upon the gallery.
McGuire looked upon things strange to him. The ranch-house was the best in
the country. It was built of brick hauled one hundred miles by wagon, but it
was of but one story, and its four rooms were completely encircled by a mud
floor "gallery." The miscellaneous setting of horses, dogs, saddles, wagons,
guns, and cow-punchers' paraphernalia oppressed the metropolitan eyes of the
wrecked sportsman.
"Well, here we are at home," said Raidler, cheeringly.
"It's a h--l of a looking place," said McGuire promptly, as he rolled upon the
gallery floor in a fit of coughing.
"We'll try to make it comfortable for you, buddy," said the cattleman gently. "It
ain't fine inside; but it's the outdoors, anyway, that'll do you the most good.
This'll be your room, in here. Anything we got, you ask for it."
He led McGuire into the east room. The floor was bare and clean. White
curtains waved in the gulf breeze through the open windows. A big willow
rocker, two straight chairs, a long table covered with newspapers, pipes,
tobacco, spurs, and cartridges stood in the centre. Some well-mounted heads
of deer and one of an enormous black javeli projected from the walls. A wide,
cool cot-bed stood in a corner. Nueces County people regarded this guest
chamber as fit for a prince. McGuire showed his eyeteeth at it. He took out his
nickel and spun it up to the ceiling.
"T'ought I was lyin' about the money, did ye? Well, you can frisk me if you
wanter. Dat's the last simoleon in the treasury. Who's goin' to pay?"

The cattleman's clear grey eyes looked steadily from under his grizzly brows
into the huckleberry optics of his guest. After a little he said simply, and not
ungraciously, "I'll be much obliged to you, son, if you won't mention money
any more. Once was quite a plenty. Folks I ask to my ranch don't have to pay
anything, and they very scarcely ever offers it. Supper'll be ready in half an
hour. There's water in the pitcher, and some, cooler, to drink, in that red jar
hanging on the gallery."
"Where's the bell?" asked McGuire, looking about.
"Bell for what?"
"Bell to ring for things. I can't--see here," he exploded in a sudden, weak fury,
"I never asked you to bring me here. I never held you up for a cent. I never
gave you a hard-luck story till you asked me. Here I am fifty miles from a
bellboy or a cocktail. I'm sick. I can't hustle. Gee! but I'm up against it!"
McGuire fell upon the cot and sobbed shiveringly.
Raidler went to the door and called. A slender, bright-complexioned Mexican
youth about twenty came quickly. Raidler spoke to him in Spanish.
"Ylario, it is in my mind that I promised you the position of /vaquero/ on the
San Carlos range at the fall /rodeo/."
"/Si, senor/, such was your goodness."
"Listen. This /senorito/ is my friend. He is very sick. Place yourself at his side.
Attend to his wants at all times. Have much patience and care with him. And
when he is well, or--and when he is well, instead of /vaquero/ I will make you
/mayordomo/ of the Rancho de las Piedras. /Esta bueno/?"
"/Si, si--mil gracias, senor/." Ylario tried to kneel upon the floor in his
gratitude, but the cattleman kicked at him benevolently, growling, "None of
your opery-house antics, now."
Ten minutes later Ylario came from McGuire's room and stood before Raidler.
"The little /senor/," he announced, "presents his compliments" (Raidler
credited Ylario with the preliminary) "and desires some pounded ice, one hot
bath, one gin feez-z, that the windows be all closed, toast, one shave, one
Newyorkheral', cigarettes, and to send one telegram."
Raidler took a quart bottle of whisky from his medicine cabinet. "Here, take
him this," he said.
Thus was instituted the reign of terror at the Solito Ranch. For a few weeks
McGuire blustered and boasted and swaggered before the cow- punchers who
rode in for miles around to see this latest importation of Raidler's. He was an
absolutely new experience to them. He explained to them all the intricate
points of sparring and the tricks of training and defence. He opened to their

minds' view all the indecorous life of a tagger after professional sports. His
jargon of slang was a continuous joy and surprise to them. His gestures, his
strange poses, his frank ribaldry of tongue and principle fascinated them. He
was like a being from a new world.
Strange to say, this new world he had entered did not exist to him. He was an
utter egoist of bricks and mortar. He had dropped out, he felt, into open space
for a time, and all it contained was an audience for his reminiscences. Neither
the limitless freedom of the prairie days nor the grand hush of the close-drawn,
spangled nights touched him. All the hues of Aurora could not win him from
the pink pages of a sporting journal. "Get something for nothing," was his
mission in life; "Thirty-seventh" Street was his goal.
Nearly two months after his arrival he began to complain that he felt worse. It
was then that he became the ranch's incubus, its harpy, its Old Man of the Sea.
He shut himself in his room like some venomous kobold or flibbertigibbet,
whining, complaining, cursing, accusing. The keynote of his plaint was that he
had been inveigled into a gehenna against his will; that he was dying of
neglect and lack of comforts. With all his dire protestations of increasing
illness, to the eye of others he remained unchanged. His currant-like eyes were
as bright and diabolic as ever; his voice was as rasping; his callous face, with
the skin drawn tense as a drum-head, had no flesh to lose. A flush on his
prominent cheek bones each afternoon hinted that a clinical thermometer
might have revealed a symptom, and percussion might have established the
fact that McGuire was breathing with only one lung, but his appearance
remained the same.
In constant attendance upon him was Ylario, whom the coming reward of the
/mayordomo/ship must have greatly stimulated, for McGuire chained him to a
bitter existence. The air--the man's only chance for life--he commanded to be
kept out by closed windows and drawn curtains. The room was always blue
and foul with cigarette smoke; whosoever entered it must sit, suffocating, and
listen to the imp's interminable gasconade concerning his scandalous career.
The oddest thing of all was the relation existing between McGuire and his
benefactor. The attitude of the invalid toward the cattleman was something
like that of a peevish, perverse child toward an indulgent parent. When Raidler
would leave the ranch McGuire would fall into a fit of malevolent, silent
sullenness. When he returned, he would be met by a string of violent and
stinging reproaches. Raidler's attitude toward his charge was quite inexplicable
in its way. The cattleman seemed actually to assume and feel the character
assigned to him by McGuire's intemperate accusations--the character of tyrant
and guilty oppressor. He seemed to have adopted the responsibility of the
fellow's condition, and he always met his tirades with a pacific, patient, and
even remorseful kindness that never altered.

One day Raidler said to him, "Try more air, son. You can have the buckboard
and a driver every day if you'll go. Try a week or two in one of the cow camps.
I'll fix you up plumb comfortable. The ground, and the air next to it--them's
the things to cure you. I knowed a man from Philadelphy, sicker than you are,
got lost on the Guadalupe, and slept on the bare grass in sheep camps for two
weeks. Well, sir, it started him getting well, which he done. Close to the
ground--that's where the medicine in the air stays. Try a little hossback riding
now. There's a gentle pony--"
"What've I done to yer?" screamed McGuire. "Did I ever doublecross yer? Did
I ask you to bring me here? Drive me out to your camps if you wanter; or stick
a knife in me and save trouble. Ride! I can't lift my feet. I couldn't sidestep a
jab from a five-year-old kid. That's what your d--d ranch has done for me.
There's nothing to eat, nothing to see, and nobody to talk to but a lot of
Reubens who don't know a punching bag from a lobster salad."
"It's a lonesome place, for certain," apologised Raidler abashedly. "We got
plenty, but it's rough enough. Anything you think of you want, the boys'll ride
up and fetch it down for you."
It was Chad Murchison, a cow-puncher from the Circle Bar outfit, who first
suggested that McGuire's illness was fraudulent. Chad had brought a basket of
grapes for him thirty miles, and four out of his way, tied to his saddle-horn.
After remaining in the smoke-tainted room for a while, he emerged and
bluntly confided his suspicions to Raidler.
"His arm," said Chad, "is harder'n a diamond. He interduced me to what he
called a shore-perplexus punch, and 'twas like being kicked twice by a
mustang. He's playin' it low down on you, Curt. He ain't no sicker'n I am. I
hate to say it, but the runt's workin' you for range and shelter."
The cattleman's ingenuous mind refused to entertain Chad's view of the case,
and when, later, he came to apply the test, doubt entered not into his motives.
One day, about noon, two men drove up to the ranch, alighted, hitched, and
came in to dinner; standing and general invitations being the custom of the
country. One of them was a great San Antonio doctor, whose costly services
had been engaged by a wealthy cowman who had been laid low by an
accidental bullet. He was now being driven back to the station to take the train
back to town. After dinner Raidler took him aside, pushed a twenty-dollar bill
against his hand, and said:
"Doc, there's a young chap in that room I guess has got a bad case of
consumption. I'd like for you to look him over and see just how bad he is, and
if we can do anything for him."
"How much was that dinner I just ate, Mr. Raidler?" said the doctor bluffly,
looking over his spectacles. Raidler returned the money to his pocket. The

doctor immediately entered McGuire's room, and the cattleman seated himself
upon a heap of saddles on the gallery, ready to reproach himself in the event
the verdict should be unfavourable.
In ten minutes the doctor came briskly out. "Your man," he said promptly, "is
as sound as a new dollar. His lungs are better than mine. Respiration,
temperature, and pulse normal. Chest expansion four inches. Not a sign of
weakness anywhere. Of course I didn't examine for the bacillus, but it isn't
there. You can put my name to the diagnosis. Even cigarettes and a vilely
close room haven't hurt him. Coughs, does he? Well, you tell him it isn't
necessary. You asked if there is anything we could do for him. Well, I advise
you to set him digging post-holes or breaking mustangs. There's our team
ready. Good- day, sir." And like a puff of wholesome, blustery wind the doctor
was off.
Raidler reached out and plucked a leaf from a mesquite bush by the railing,
and began chewing it thoughtfully.
The branding season was at hand, and the next morning Ross Hargis, foreman
of the outfit, was mustering his force of some twenty-five men at the ranch,
ready to start for the San Carlos range, where the work was to begin. By six
o'clock the horses were all saddled, the grub wagon ready, and the cowpunchers were swinging themselves upon their mounts, when Raidler bade
them wait. A boy was bringing up an extra pony, bridled and saddled, to the
gate. Raidler walked to McGuire's room and threw open the door. McGuire
was lying on his cot, not yet dressed, smoking.
"Get up," said the cattleman, and his voice was clear and brassy, like a bugle.
"How's that?" asked McGuire, a little startled.
"Get up and dress. I can stand a rattlesnake, but I hate a liar. Do I have to tell
you again?" He caught McGuire by the neck and stood him on the floor.
"Say, friend," cried McGuire wildly, "are you bug-house? I'm sick-- see? I'll
croak if I got to hustle. What've I done to yer?"--he began his chronic whine-"I never asked yer to--"
"Put on your clothes," called Raidler in a rising tone.
Swearing, stumbling, shivering, keeping his amazed, shining eyes upon the
now menacing form of the aroused cattleman, McGuire managed to tumble
into his clothes. Then Raidler took him by the collar and shoved him out and
across the yard to the extra pony hitched at the gate. The cow-punchers lolled
in their saddles, open-mouthed.
"Take this man," said Raidler to Ross Hargis, "and put him to work. Make him
work hard, sleep hard, and eat hard. You boys know I done what I could for
him, and he was welcome. Yesterday the best doctor in San Antone examined

him, and says he's got the lungs of a burro and the constitution of a steer. You
know what to do with him, Ross."
Ross Hargis only smiled grimly.
"Aw," said McGuire, looking intently at Raidler, with a peculiar expression
upon his face, "the croaker said I was all right, did he? Said I was fakin', did
he? You put him onto me. You t'ought I wasn't sick. You said I was a liar. Say,
friend, I talked rough, I know, but I didn't mean most of it. If you felt like I
did--aw! I forgot--I ain't sick, the croaker says. Well, friend, now I'll go work
for yer. Here's where you play even."
He sprang into the saddle easily as a bird, got the quirt from the horn, and gave
his pony a slash with it. "Cricket," who once brought in Good Boy by a neck
at Hawthorne--and a 10 to 1 shot--had his foot in the stirrups again.
McGuire led the cavalcade as they dashed away for San Carlos, and the cowpunchers gave a yell of applause as they closed in behind his dust.
But in less than a mile he had lagged to the rear, and was last man when they
struck the patch of high chaparral below the horse pens. Behind a clump of
this he drew rein, and held a handkerchief to his mouth. He took it away
drenched with bright, arterial blood, and threw it carefully into a clump of
prickly pear. Then he slashed with his quirt again, gasped "G'wan" to his
astonished pony, and galloped after the gang.
That night Raidler received a message from his old home in Alabama. There
had been a death in the family; an estate was to divide, and they called for him
to come. Daylight found him in the buckboard, skimming the prairies for the
station. It was two months before he returned. When he arrived at the ranch
house he found it well-nigh deserted save for Ylario, who acted as a kind of
steward during his absence. Little by little the youth made him acquainted
with the work done while he was away. The branding camp, he was informed,
was still doing business. On account of many severe storms the cattle had been
badly scattered, and the branding had been accomplished but slowly. The
camp was now in the valley of the Guadalupe, twenty miles away.
"By the way," said Raidler, suddenly remembering, "that fellow I sent along
with them--McGuire--is he working yet?"
"I do not know," said Ylario. "Mans from the camp come verree few times to
the ranch. So plentee work with the leetle calves. They no say. Oh, I think that
fellow McGuire he dead much time ago."
"Dead!" said Raidler. "What you talking about?"
"Verree sick fellow, McGuire," replied Ylario, with a shrug of his shoulder. "I
theenk he no live one, two month when he go away."
"Shucks!" said Raidler. "He humbugged you, too, did he? The doctor

examined him and said he was sound as a mesquite knot."
"That doctor," said Ylario, smiling, "he tell you so? That doctor no see
McGuire."
"Talk up," ordered Raidler. "What the devil do you mean?"
"McGuire," continued the boy tranquilly, "he getting drink water outside when
that doctor come in room. That doctor take me and pound me all over here
with his fingers"--putting his hand to his chest--"I not know for what. He put
his ear here and here and here, and listen-- I not know for what. He put little
glass stick in my mouth. He feel my arm here. He make me count like
whisper--so--twenty, /treinta/, /cuarenta/. Who knows," concluded Ylario, with
a deprecating spread of his hands, "for what that doctor do those verree droll
and such-like things?"
"What horses are up?" asked Raidler shortly.
"Paisano is grazing out behind the little corral, /senor/."
"Saddle him for me at once."
Within a very few minutes the cattleman was mounted and away. Paisano, well
named after that ungainly but swift-running bird, struck into his long lope that
ate up the ground like a strip of macaroni. In two hours and a quarter Raidler,
from a gentle swell, saw the branding camp by a water hole in the Guadalupe.
Sick with expectancy of the news he feared, he rode up, dismounted, and
dropped Paisano's reins. So gentle was his heart that at that moment he would
have pleaded guilty to the murder of McGuire.
The only being in the camp was the cook, who was just arranging the hunks of
barbecued beef, and distributing the tin coffee cups for supper. Raidler evaded
a direct question concerning the one subject in his mind.
"Everything all right in camp, Pete?" he managed to inquire.
"So, so," said Pete, conservatively. "Grub give out twice. Wind scattered the
cattle, and we've had to rake the brush for forty mile. I need a new coffee-pot.
And the mosquitos is some more hellish than common."
"The boys--all well?"
Pete was no optimist. Besides, inquiries concerning the health of cowpunchers were not only superfluous, but bordered on flaccidity. It was not like
the boss to make them.
"What's left of 'em don't miss no calls to grub," the cook conceded.
"What's left of 'em?" repeated Raidler in a husky voice. Mechanically he
began to look around for McGuire's grave. He had in his mind a white slab
such as he had seen in the Alabama church-yard. But immediately he knew
that was foolish.

"Sure," said Pete; "what's left. Cow camps change in two months. Some's
gone."
Raidler nerved himself.
"That--chap--I sent along--McGuire--did--he--"
"Say," interrupted Pete, rising with a chunk of corn bread in each hand, "that
was a dirty shame, sending that poor, sick kid to a cow camp. A doctor that
couldn't tell he was graveyard meat ought to be skinned with a cinch buckle.
Game as he was, too--it's a scandal among snakes--lemme tell you what he
done. First night in camp the boys started to initiate him in the leather
breeches degree. Ross Hargis busted him one swipe with his chaparreras, and
what do you reckon the poor child did? Got up, the little skeeter, and licked
Ross. Licked Ross Hargis. Licked him good. Hit him plenty and everywhere
and hard. Ross'd just get up and pick out a fresh place to lay down on agin.
"Then that McGuire goes off there and lays down with his head in the grass
and bleeds. A hem'ridge they calls it. He lays there eighteen hours by the
watch, and they can't budge him. Then Ross Hargis, who loves any man who
can lick him, goes to work and damns the doctors from Greenland to Poland
Chiny; and him and Green Branch Johnson they gets McGuire into a tent, and
spells each other feedin' him chopped raw meat and whisky.
"But it looks like the kid ain't got no appetite to git well, for they misses him
from the tent in the night and finds him rootin' in the grass, and likewise a
drizzle fallin'. 'G'wan,' he says, 'lemme go and die like I wanter. He said I was
a liar and a fake and I was playin' sick. Lemme alone.'
"Two weeks," went on the cook, "he laid around, not noticin' nobody, and
then--"
A sudden thunder filled the air, and a score of galloping centaurs crashed
through the brush into camp.
"Illustrious rattlesnakes!" exclaimed Pete, springing all ways at once; "here's
the boys come, and I'm an assassinated man if supper ain't ready in three
minutes."
But Raidler saw only one thing. A little, brown-faced, grinning chap, springing
from his saddle in the full light of the fire. McGuire was not like that, and yet-In another instant the cattleman was holding him by the hand and shoulder.
"Son, son, how goes it?" was all he found to say.
"Close to the ground, says you," shouted McGuire, crunching Raidler's fingers
in a grip of steel; "and dat's where I found it--healt' and strengt', and tumbled
to what a cheap skate I been actin'. T'anks fer kickin' me out, old man. And-say! de joke's on dat croaker, ain't it? I looked t'rough the window and see him

playin' tag on dat Dago kid's solar plexus."
"You son of a tinker," growled the cattleman, "whyn't you talk up and say the
doctor never examined you?"
"Ah--g'wan!" said McGuire, with a flash of his old asperity, "nobody can't
bluff me. You never ast me. You made your spiel, and you t'rowed me out, and
I let it go at dat. And, say, friend, dis chasin' cows is outer sight. Dis is de
whitest bunch of sports I ever travelled with. You'll let me stay, won't yer, old
man?"
Raidler looked wonderingly toward Ross Hargis.
"That cussed little runt," remarked Ross tenderly, "is the Jo-dartin'est hustler-and the hardest hitter in anybody's cow camp."

VIII
AN AFTERNOON MIRACLE
At the United States end of an international river bridge, four armed rangers
sweltered in a little 'dobe hut, keeping a fairly faithful espionage upon the
lagging trail of passengers from the Mexican side.
Bud Dawson, proprietor of the Top Notch Saloon, had, on the evening
previous, violently ejected from his premises one Leandro Garcia, for alleged
violation of the Top Notch code of behaviour. Garcia had mentioned twentyfour hours as a limit, by which time he would call and collect a painful
indemnity for personal satisfaction.
This Mexican, although a tremendous braggart, was thoroughly courageous,
and each side of the river respected him for one of these attributes. He and a
following of similar bravoes were addicted to the pastime of retrieving towns
from stagnation.
The day designated by Garcia for retribution was to be further signalised on
the American side by a cattlemen's convention, a bull fight, and an old settlers'
barbecue and picnic. Knowing the avenger to be a man of his word, and
believing it prudent to court peace while three such gently social relaxations
were in progress, Captain McNulty, of the ranger company stationed there,
detailed his lieutenant and three men for duty at the end of the bridge. Their
instructions were to prevent the invasion of Garcia, either alone or attended by
his gang.
Travel was slight that sultry afternoon, and the rangers swore gently, and
mopped their brows in their convenient but close quarters. For an hour no one
had crossed save an old woman enveloped in a brown wrapper and a black

mantilla, driving before her a burro loaded with kindling wood tied in small
bundles for peddling. Then three shots were fired down the street, the sound
coming clear and snappy through the still air.
The four rangers quickened from sprawling, symbolic figures of indolence to
alert life, but only one rose to his feet. Three turned their eyes beseechingly
but hopelessly upon the fourth, who had gotten nimbly up and was buckling
his cartridge-belt around him. The three knew that Lieutenant Bob Buckley, in
command, would allow no man of them the privilege of investigating a row
when he himself might go.
The agile, broad-chested lieutenant, without a change of expression in his
smooth, yellow-brown, melancholy face, shot the belt strap through the guard
of the buckle, hefted his sixes in their holsters as a belle gives the finishing
touches to her toilette, caught up his Winchester, and dived for the door. There
he paused long enough to caution his comrades to maintain their watch upon
the bridge, and then plunged into the broiling highway.
The three relapsed into resigned inertia and plaintive comment.
"I've heard of fellows," grumbled Broncho Leathers, "what was wedded to
danger, but if Bob Buckley ain't committed bigamy with trouble, I'm a son of a
gun."
"Peculiarness of Bob is," inserted the Nueces Kid, "he ain't had proper trainin'.
He never learned how to git skeered. Now, a man ought to be skeered enough
when he tackles a fuss to hanker after readin' his name on the list of survivors,
anyway."
"Buckley," commented Ranger No. 3, who was a misguided Eastern man,
burdened with an education, "scraps in such a solemn manner that I have been
led to doubt its spontaneity. I'm not quite onto his system, but he fights, like
Tybalt, by the book of arithmetic."
"I never heard," mentioned Broncho, "about any of Dibble's ways of mixin'
scrappin' and cipherin'."
"Triggernometry?" suggested the Nueces infant.
"That's rather better than I hoped from you," nodded the Easterner,
approvingly. "The other meaning is that Buckley never goes into a fight
without giving away weight. He seems to dread taking the slightest advantage.
That's quite close to foolhardiness when you are dealing with horse-thieves
and fence-cutters who would ambush you any night, and shoot you in the back
if they could. Buckley's too full of sand. He'll play Horatius and hold the
bridge once too often some day."
"I'm on there," drawled the Kid; "I mind that bridge gang in the reader. Me, I
go instructed for the other chap--Spurious Somebody--the one that fought and

pulled his freight, to fight 'em on some other day."
"Anyway," summed up Broncho, "Bob's about the gamest man I ever see
along the Rio Bravo. Great Sam Houston! If she gets any hotter she'll sizzle!"
Broncho whacked at a scorpion with his four-pound Stetson felt, and the three
watchers relapsed into comfortless silence.
How well Bob Buckley had kept his secret, since these men, for two years his
side comrades in countless border raids and dangers, thus spake of him, not
knowing that he was the most arrant physical coward in all that Rio Bravo
country! Neither his friends nor his enemies had suspected him of aught else
than the finest courage. It was purely a physical cowardice, and only by an
extreme, grim effort of will had he forced his craven body to do the bravest
deeds. Scourging himself always, as a monk whips his besetting sin, Buckley
threw himself with apparent recklessness into every danger, with the hope of
some day ridding himself of the despised affliction. But each successive test
brought no relief, and the ranger's face, by nature adapted to cheerfulness and
good-humour, became set to the guise of gloomy melancholy. Thus, while the
frontier admired his deeds, and his prowess was celebrated in print and by
word of mouth in many camp- fires in the valley of the Bravo, his heart was
sick within him. Only himself knew of the horrible tightening of the chest, the
dry mouth, the weakening of the spine, the agony of the strung nerves--the
never- failing symptoms of his shameful malady.
One mere boy in his company was wont to enter a fray with a leg perched
flippantly about the horn of his saddle, a cigarette hanging from his lips, which
emitted smoke and original slogans of clever invention. Buckley would have
given a year's pay to attain that devil- may-care method. Once the debonair
youth said to him: "Buck, you go into a scrap like it was a funeral. Not," he
added, with a complimentary wave of his tin cup, "but what it generally is."
Buckley's conscience was of the New England order with Western
adjustments, and he continued to get his rebellious body into as many
difficulties as possible; wherefore, on that sultry afternoon he chose to drive
his own protesting limbs to investigation of that sudden alarm that had startled
the peace and dignity of the State.
Two squares down the street stood the Top Notch Saloon. Here Buckley came
upon signs of recent upheaval. A few curious spectators pressed about its front
entrance, grinding beneath their heels the fragments of a plate-glass window.
Inside, Buckley found Bud Dawson utterly ignoring a bullet wound in his
shoulder, while he feelingly wept at having to explain why he failed to drop
the "blamed masquerooter," who shot him. At the entrance of the ranger Bud
turned appealingly to him for confirmation of the devastation he might have
dealt.

"You know, Buck, I'd 'a' plum got him, first rattle, if I'd thought a minute.
Come in a-masque-rootin', playin' female till he got the drop, and turned loose.
I never reached for a gun, thinkin' it was sure Chihuahua Betty, or Mrs.
Atwater, or anyhow one of the Mayfield girls comin' a-gunnin', which they
might, liable as not. I never thought of that blamed Garcia until--"
"Garcia!" snapped Buckley. "How did he get over here?"
Bud's bartender took the ranger by the arm and led him to the side door. There
stood a patient grey burro cropping the grass along the gutter, with a load of
kindling wood tied across its back. On the ground lay a black shawl and a
voluminous brown dress.
"Masquerootin' in them things," called Bud, still resisting attempted
ministrations to his wounds. "Thought he was a lady till he gave a yell and
winged me."
"He went down this side street," said the bartender. "He was alone, and he'll
hide out till night when his gang comes over. You ought to find him in that
Mexican lay-out below the depot. He's got a girl down there--Pancha Sales."
"How was he armed?" asked Buckley.
"Two pearl-handled sixes, and a knife."
"Keep this for me, Billy," said the ranger, handing over his Winchester.
Quixotic, perhaps, but it was Bob Buckley's way. Another man--and a braver
one--might have raised a posse to accompany him. It was Buckley's rule to
discard all preliminary advantage.
The Mexican had left behind him a wake of closed doors and an empty street,
but now people were beginning to emerge from their places of refuge with
assumed unconsciousness of anything having happened. Many citizens who
knew the ranger pointed out to him with alacrity the course of Garcia's retreat.
As Buckley swung along upon the trail he felt the beginning of the suffocating
constriction about his throat, the cold sweat under the brim of his hat, the old,
shameful, dreaded sinking of his heart as it went down, down, down in his
bosom.
The morning train of the Mexican Central had that day been three hours late,
thus failing to connect with the I. & G.N. on the other side of the river.
Passengers for /Los Estados Unidos/ grumblingly sought entertainment in the
little swaggering mongrel town of two nations, for, until the morrow, no other
train would come to rescue them. Grumblingly, because two days later would
begin the great fair and races in San Antone. Consider that at that time San
Antone was the hub of the wheel of Fortune, and the names of its spokes were
Cattle, Wool, Faro, Running Horses, and Ozone. In those times cattlemen

played at crack-loo on the sidewalks with double-eagles, and gentlemen
backed their conception of the fortuitous card with stacks limited in height
only by the interference of gravity. Wherefore, thither journeyed the sowers
and the reapers--they who stampeded the dollars, and they who rounded them
up. Especially did the caterers to the amusement of the people haste to San
Antone. Two greatest shows on earth were already there, and dozens of
smallest ones were on the way.
On a side track near the mean little 'dobe depot stood a private car, left there
by the Mexican train that morning and doomed by an ineffectual schedule to
ignobly await, amid squalid surroundings, connection with the next day's
regular.
The car had been once a common day-coach, but those who had sat in it and
gringed to the conductor's hat-band slips would never have recognised it in its
transformation. Paint and gilding and certain domestic touches had liberated it
from any suspicion of public servitude. The whitest of lace curtains
judiciously screened its windows. From its fore end drooped in the torrid air
the flag of Mexico. From its rear projected the Stars and Stripes and a busy
stovepipe, the latter reinforcing in its suggestion of culinary comforts the
general suggestion of privacy and ease. The beholder's eye, regarding its
gorgeous sides, found interest to culminate in a single name in gold and blue
letters extending almost its entire length--a single name, the audacious
privilege of royalty and genius. Doubly, then, was this arrogant nomenclature
here justified; for the name was that of "Alvarita, Queen of the Serpent Tribe."
This, her car, was back from a triumphant tour of the principal Mexican cities,
and now headed for San Antonio, where, according to promissory
advertisement, she would exhibit her "Marvellous Dominion and Fearless
Control over Deadly and Venomous Serpents, Handling them with Ease as
they Coil and Hiss to the Terror of Thousands of Tongue-tied Tremblers!"
One hundred in the shade kept the vicinity somewhat depeopled. This quarter
of the town was a ragged edge; its denizens the bubbling froth of five nations;
its architecture tent, /jacal/, and 'dobe; its distractions the hurdy-gurdy and the
informal contribution to the sudden stranger's store of experience. Beyond this
dishonourable fringe upon the old town's jowl rose a dense mass of trees,
surmounting and filling a little hollow. Through this bickered a small stream
that perished down the sheer and disconcerting side of the great canon of the
Rio Bravo del Norte.
In this sordid spot was condemned to remain for certain hours the impotent
transport of the Queen of the Serpent Tribe.
The front door of the car was open. Its forward end was curtained off into a
small reception-room. Here the admiring and propitiatory reporters were wont
to sit and transpose the music of Senorita Alvarita's talk into the more florid

key of the press. A picture of Abraham Lincoln hung against a wall; one of a
cluster of school-girls grouped upon stone steps was in another place; a third
was Easter lilies in a blood-red frame. A neat carpet was under foot. A pitcher,
sweating cold drops, and a glass stood on a fragile stand. In a willow rocker,
reading a newspaper, sat Alvarita.
Spanish, you would say; Andalusian, or, better still, Basque; that compound,
like the diamond, of darkness and fire. Hair, the shade of purple grapes viewed
at midnight. Eyes, long, dusky, and disquieting with their untroubled
directness of gaze. Face, haughty and bold, touched with a pretty insolence
that gave it life. To hasten conviction of her charm, but glance at the stacks of
handbills in the corner, green, and yellow, and white. Upon them you see an
incompetent presentment of the senorita in her professional garb and pose.
Irresistible, in black lace and yellow ribbons, she faces you; a blue racer is
spiralled upon each bare arm; coiled twice about her waist and once about her
neck, his horrid head close to hers, you perceive Kuku, the great eleven-foot
Asian python.
A hand drew aside the curtain that partitioned the car, and a middle- aged,
faded woman holding a knife and a half-peeled potato looked in and said:
"Alviry, are you right busy?"
"I'm reading the home paper, ma. What do you think! that pale, tow- headed
Matilda Price got the most votes in the /News/ for the prettiest girl in Gallipo-/lees/."
"Shush! She wouldn't of done it if /you'd/ been home, Alviry. Lord knows, I
hope we'll be there before fall's over. I'm tired gallopin' round the world playin'
we are dagoes, and givin' snake shows. But that ain't what I wanted to say.
That there biggest snake's gone again. I've looked all over the car and can't
find him. He must have been gone an hour. I remember hearin' somethin'
rustlin' along the floor, but I thought it was you."
"Oh, blame that old rascal!" exclaimed the Queen, throwing down her paper.
"This is the third time he's got away. George never /will/ fasten down the lid to
his box properly. I do believe he's /afraid/ of Kuku. Now I've got to go hunt
him."
"Better hurry; somebody might hurt him."
The Queen's teeth showed in a gleaming, contemptuous smile. "No danger.
When they see Kuku outside they simply scoot away and buy bromides.
There's a crick over between here and the river. That old scamp'd swap his
skin any time for a drink of running water. I guess I'll find him there, all right."
A few minutes later Alvarita stopped upon the forward platform, ready for her
quest. Her handsome black skirt was shaped to the most recent proclamation

of fashion. Her spotless shirt-waist gladdened the eye in that desert of
sunshine, a swelling oasis, cool and fresh. A man's split-straw hat sat firmly on
her coiled, abundant hair. Beneath her serene, round, impudent chin a man's
four-in-hand tie was jauntily knotted about a man's high, stiff collar. A parasol
she carried, of white silk, and its fringe was lace, yellowly genuine.
I will grant Gallipolis as to her costume, but firmly to Seville or Valladolid I
am held by her eyes; castanets, balconies, mantillas, serenades, ambuscades,
escapades--all these their dark depths guaranteed.
"Ain't you afraid to go out alone, Alviry?" queried the Queen-mother
anxiously. "There's so many rough people about. Mebbe you'd better--"
"I never saw anything I was afraid of yet, ma. 'Specially people. And men in
particular. Don't you fret. I'll trot along back as soon as I find that runaway
scamp."
The dust lay thick upon the bare ground near the tracks. Alvarita's eye soon
discovered the serrated trail of the escaped python. It led across the depot
grounds and away down a smaller street in the direction of the little canon, as
predicted by her. A stillness and lack of excitement in the neighbourhood
encouraged the hope that, as yet, the inhabitants were unaware that so
formidable a guest traversed their highways. The heat had driven them
indoors, whence outdrifted occasional shrill laughs, or the depressing whine of
a maltreated concertina. In the shade a few Mexican children, like vivified
stolid idols in clay, stared from their play, vision-struck and silent, as Alvarita
came and went. Here and there a woman peeped from a door and stood dumb,
reduced to silence by the aspect of the white silk parasol.
A hundred yards and the limits of the town were passed, scattered chaparral
succeeding, and then a noble grove, overflowing the bijou canon. Through this
a small bright stream meandered. Park-like it was, with a kind of cockney
ruralness further endorsed by the waste papers and rifled tins of picnickers. Up
this stream, and down it, among its pseudo-sylvan glades and depressions,
wandered the bright and unruffled Alvarita. Once she saw evidence of the
recreant reptile's progress in his distinctive trail across a spread of fine sand in
the arroyo. The living water was bound to lure him; he could not be far away.
So sure was she of his immediate proximity that she perched herself to idle for
a time in the curve of a great creeper that looped down from a giant water-elm.
To reach this she climbed from the pathway a little distance up the side of a
steep and rugged incline. Around her chaparral grew thick and high. A lateblooming ratama tree dispensed from its yellow petals a sweet and persistent
odour. Adown the ravine rustled a seductive wind, melancholy with the taste
of sodden, fallen leaves.
Alvarita removed her hat, and undoing the oppressive convolutions of her hair,

began to slowly arrange it in two long, dusky plaits.
From the obscure depths of a thick clump of evergreen shrubs five feet away,
two small jewel-bright eyes were steadfastly regarding her. Coiled there lay
Kuku, the great python; Kuku, the magnificent, he of the plated muzzle, the
grooved lips, the eleven-foot stretch of elegantly and brilliantly mottled skin.
The great python was viewing his mistress without a sound or motion to
disclose his presence. Perhaps the splendid truant forefelt his capture, but,
screened by the foliage, thought to prolong the delight of his escapade. What
pleasure it was, after the hot and dusty car, to lie thus, smelling the running
water, and feeling the agreeable roughness of the earth and stones against his
body! Soon, very soon the Queen would find him, and he, powerless as a
worm in her audacious hands, would be returned to the dark chest in the
narrow house that ran on wheels.
Alvarita heard a sudden crunching of the gravel below her. Turning her head
she saw a big, swarthy Mexican, with a daring and evil expression,
contemplating her with an ominous, dull eye.
"What do you want?" she asked as sharply as five hairpins between her lips
would permit, continuing to plait her hair, and looking him over with placid
contempt. The Mexican continued to gaze at her, and showed his teeth in a
white, jagged smile.
"I no hurt-y you, Senorita," he said.
"You bet you won't," answered the Queen, shaking back one finished, massive
plait. "But don't you think you'd better move on?"
"Not hurt-y you--no. But maybeso take one /beso/--one li'l kees, you call him."
The man smiled again, and set his foot to ascend the slope. Alvarita leaned
swiftly and picked up a stone the size of a cocoanut.
"Vamoose, quick," she ordered peremptorily, "you /coon/!"
The red of insult burned through the Mexican's dark skin.
"/Hidalgo, Yo/!" he shot between his fangs. "I am not neg-r-ro! /Diabla
bonita/, for that you shall pay me."
He made two quick upward steps this time, but the stone, hurled by no weak
arm, struck him square in the chest. He staggered back to the footway,
swerved half around, and met another sight that drove all thoughts of the girl
from his head. She turned her eyes to see what had diverted his interest. A man
with red-brown, curling hair and a melancholy, sunburned, smooth-shaven
face was coming up the path, twenty yards away. Around the Mexican's waist
was buckled a pistol belt with two empty holsters. He had laid aside his sixes-possibly in the /jacal/ of the fair Pancha--and had forgotten them when the
passing of the fairer Alvarita had enticed him to her trail. His hands now flew

instinctively to the holsters, but finding the weapons gone, he spread his
fingers outward with the eloquent, abjuring, deprecating Latin gesture, and
stood like a rock. Seeing his plight, the newcomer unbuckled his own belt
containing two revolvers, threw it upon the ground, and continued to advance.
"Splendid!" murmured Alvarita, with flashing eyes.
As Bob Buckley, according to the mad code of bravery that his sensitive
conscience imposed upon his cowardly nerves, abandoned his guns and closed
in upon his enemy, the old, inevitable nausea of abject fear wrung him. His
breath whistled through his constricted air passages. His feet seemed like
lumps of lead. His mouth was dry as dust. His heart, congested with blood,
hurt his ribs as it thumped against them. The hot June day turned to moist
November. And still he advanced, spurred by a mandatory pride that strained
its uttermost against his weakling flesh.
The distance between the two men slowly lessened. The Mexican stood,
immovable, waiting. When scarce five yards separated them a little shower of
loosened gravel rattled down from above to the ranger's feet. He glanced
upward with instinctive caution. A pair of dark eyes, brilliantly soft, and fierily
tender, encountered and held his own. The most fearful heart and the boldest
one in all the Rio Bravo country exchanged a silent and inscrutable
communication. Alvarita, still seated within her vine, leaned forward above
the breast-high chaparral. One hand was laid across her bosom. One great dark
braid curved forward over her shoulder. Her lips were parted; her face was lit
with what seemed but wonder--great and absolute wonder. Her eyes lingered
upon Buckley's. Let no one ask or presume to tell through what subtle medium
the miracle was performed. As by a lightning flash two clouds will accomplish
counterpoise and compensation of electric surcharge, so on that eyeglance the
man received his complement of manhood, and the maid conceded what
enriched her womanly grace by its loss.
The Mexican, suddenly stirring, ventilated his attitude of apathetic waiting by
conjuring swiftly from his bootleg a long knife. Buckley cast aside his hat, and
laughed once aloud, like a happy school-boy at a frolic. Then, empty-handed,
he sprang nimbly, and Garcia met him without default.
So soon was the engagement ended that disappointment imposed upon the
ranger's warlike ecstasy. Instead of dealing the traditional downward stroke,
the Mexican lunged straight with his knife. Buckley took the precarious
chance, and caught his wrist, fair and firm. Then he delivered the good Saxon
knock-out blow--always so pathetically disastrous to the fistless Latin races-and Garcia was down and out, with his head under a clump of prickly pears.
The ranger looked up again to the Queen of the Serpents.

Alvarita scrambled down to the path.
"I'm mighty glad I happened along when I did," said the ranger.
"He--he frightened me so!" cooed Alvarita.
They did not hear the long, low hiss of the python under the shrubs. Wiliest of
the beasts, no doubt he was expressing the humiliation he felt at having so
long dwelt in subjection to this trembling and colouring mistress of his whom
he had deemed so strong and potent and fearsome.
Then came galloping to the spot the civic authorities; and to them the ranger
awarded the prostrate disturber of the peace, whom they bore away limply
across the saddle of one of their mounts. But Buckley and Alvarita lingered.
Slowly, slowly they walked. The ranger regained his belt of weapons. With a
fine timidity she begged the indulgence of fingering the great .45's, with little
"Ohs" and "Ahs" of new-born, delicious shyness.
The /canoncito/ was growing dusky. Beyond its terminus in the river bluff they
could see the outer world yet suffused with the waning glory of sunset.
A scream--a piercing scream of fright from Alvarita. Back she cowered, and
the ready, protecting arm of Buckley formed her refuge. What terror so dire as
to thus beset the close of the reign of the never- before-daunted Queen?
Across the path there crawled a /caterpillar/--a horrid, fuzzy, two- inch
caterpillar! Truly, Kuku, thou went avenged. Thus abdicated the Queen of the
Serpent Tribe--/viva la reina/!

IX
THE HIGHER ABDICATION
Curly the tramp sidled toward the free-lunch counter. He caught a fleeting
glance from the bartender's eye, and stood still, trying to look like a business
man who had just dined at the Menger and was waiting for a friend who had
promised to pick him up in his motor car. Curly's histrionic powers were equal
to the impersonation; but his make-up was wanting.
The bartender rounded the bar in a casual way, looking up at the ceiling as
though he was pondering some intricate problem of kalsomining, and then fell
upon Curly so suddenly that the roadster had no excuses ready. Irresistibly, but
so composedly that it seemed almost absendmindedness on his part, the
dispenser of drinks pushed Curly to the swinging doors and kicked him out,
with a nonchalance that almost amounted to sadness. That was the way of the
Southwest.

Curly arose from the gutter leisurely. He felt no anger or resentment toward
his ejector. Fifteen years of tramphood spent out of the twenty-two years of his
life had hardened the fibres of his spirit. The slings and arrows of outrageous
fortune fell blunted from the buckler of his armoured pride. With especial
resignation did he suffer contumely and injury at the hands of bartenders.
Naturally, they were his enemies; and unnaturally, they were often his friends.
He had to take his chances with them. But he had not yet learned to estimate
these cool, languid, Southwestern knights of the bungstarter, who had the
manners of an Earl of Pawtucket, and who, when they disapproved of your
presence, moved you with the silence and despatch of a chess automaton
advancing a pawn.
Curly stood for a few moments in the narrow, mesquite-paved street. San
Antonio puzzled and disturbed him. Three days he had been a non- paying
guest of the town, having dropped off there from a box car of an I. & G.N.
freight, because Greaser Johnny had told him in Des Moines that the Alamo
City was manna fallen, gathered, cooked, and served free with cream and
sugar. Curly had found the tip partly a good one. There was hospitality in
plenty of a careless, liberal, irregular sort. But the town itself was a weight
upon his spirits after his experience with the rushing, business-like,
systematised cities of the North and East. Here he was often flung a dollar, but
too frequently a good-natured kick would follow it. Once a band of hilarious
cowboys had roped him on Military Plaza and dragged him across the black
soil until no respectable rag-bag would have stood sponsor for his clothes. The
winding, doubling streets, leading nowhere, bewildered him. And then there
was a little river, crooked as a pot-hook, that crawled through the middle of
the town, crossed by a hundred little bridges so nearly alike that they got on
Curly's nerves. And the last bartender wore a number nine shoe.
The saloon stood on a corner. The hour was eight o'clock. Homefarers and
outgoers jostled Curly on the narrow stone sidewalk. Between the buildings to
his left he looked down a cleft that proclaimed itself another thoroughfare. The
alley was dark except for one patch of light. Where there was light there were
sure to be human beings. Where there were human beings after nightfall in
San Antonio there might be food, and there was sure to be drink. So Curly
headed for the light.
The illumination came from Schwegel's Cafe. On the sidewalk in front of it
Curly picked up an old envelope. It might have contained a check for a
million. It was empty; but the wanderer read the address, "Mr. Otto
Schwegel," and the name of the town and State. The postmark was Detroit.
Curly entered the saloon. And now in the light it could be perceived that he
bore the stamp of many years of vagabondage. He had none of the tidiness of
the calculating and shrewd professional tramp. His wardrobe represented the

cast-off specimens of half a dozen fashions and eras. Two factories had
combined their efforts in providing shoes for his feet. As you gazed at him
there passed through your mind vague impressions of mummies, wax figures,
Russian exiles, and men lost on desert islands. His face was covered almost to
his eyes with a curly brown beard that he kept trimmed short with a pocketknife, and that had furnished him with his /nom de route/. Light-blue eyes, full
of sullenness, fear, cunning, impudence, and fawning, witnessed the stress that
had been laid upon his soul.
The saloon was small, and in its atmosphere the odours of meat and drink
struggled for the ascendancy. The pig and the cabbage wrestled with hydrogen
and oxygen. Behind the bar Schwegel laboured with an assistant whose
epidermal pores showed no signs of being obstructed. Hot weinerwurst and
sauerkraut were being served to purchasers of beer. Curly shuffled to the end
of the bar, coughed hollowly, and told Schwegel that he was a Detroit cabinetmaker out of a job.
It followed as the night the day that he got his schooner and lunch.
"Was you acquainted maybe with Heinrich Strauss in Detroit?" asked
Schwegel.
"Did I know Heinrich Strauss?" repeated Curly, affectionately. "Why, say, 'Bo,
I wish I had a dollar for every game of pinochle me and Heine has played on
Sunday afternoons."
More beer and a second plate of steaming food was set before the diplomat.
And then Curly, knowing to a fluid-drachm how far a "con" game would go,
shuffled out into the unpromising street.
And now he began to perceive the inconveniences of this stony Southern
town. There was none of the outdoor gaiety and brilliancy and music that
provided distraction even to the poorest in the cities of the North. Here, even
so early, the gloomy, rock-walled houses were closed and barred against the
murky dampness of the night. The streets were mere fissures through which
flowed grey wreaths of river mist. As he walked he heard laughter and the
chink of coin and chips behind darkened windows, and music coming from
every chink of wood and stone. But the diversions were selfish; the day of
popular pastimes had not yet come to San Antonio.
But at length Curly, as he strayed, turned the sharp angle of another lost street
and came upon a rollicking band of stockmen from the outlying ranches
celebrating in the open in front of an ancient wooden hotel. One great roisterer
from the sheep country who had just instigated a movement toward the bar,
swept Curly in like a stray goat with the rest of his flock. The princes of kine
and wool hailed him as a new zoological discovery, and uproariously strove to
preserve him in the diluted alcohol of their compliments and regards.

An hour afterward Curly staggered from the hotel barroom dismissed by his
fickle friends, whose interest in him had subsided as quickly as it had risen.
Full--stoked with alcoholic fuel and cargoed with food, the only question
remaining to disturb him was that of shelter and bed.
A drizzling, cold Texas rain had begun to fall--an endless, lazy, unintermittent
downfall that lowered the spirits of men and raised a reluctant steam from the
warm stones of the streets and houses. Thus comes the "norther" dousing
gentle spring and amiable autumn with the chilling salutes and adieux of
coming and departing winter.
Curly followed his nose down the first tortuous street into which his
irresponsible feet conducted him. At the lower end of it, on the bank of the
serpentine stream, he perceived an open gate in a cemented rock wall. Inside
he saw camp fires and a row of low wooden sheds built against three sides of
the enclosing wall. He entered the enclosure. Under the sheds many horses
were champing at their oats and corn. Many wagons and buckboards stood
about with their teams' harness thrown carelessly upon the shafts and
doubletrees. Curly recognised the place as a wagon-yard, such as is provided
by merchants for their out-of- town friends and customers. No one was in
sight. No doubt the drivers of those wagons were scattered about the town
"seeing the elephant and hearing the owl." In their haste to become patrons of
the town's dispensaries of mirth and good cheer the last ones to depart must
have left the great wooden gate swinging open.
Curly had satisfied the hunger of an anaconda and the thirst of a camel, so he
was neither in the mood nor the condition of an explorer. He zigzagged his
way to the first wagon that his eyesight distinguished in the semi-darkness
under the shed. It was a two-horse wagon with a top of white canvas. The
wagon was half filled with loose piles of wool sacks, two or three great
bundles of grey blankets, and a number of bales, bundles, and boxes. A
reasoning eye would have estimated the load at once as ranch supplies, bound
on the morrow for some outlying hacienda. But to the drowsy intelligence of
Curly they represented only warmth and softness and protection against the
cold humidity of the night. After several unlucky efforts, at last he conquered
gravity so far as to climb over a wheel and pitch forward upon the best and
warmest bed he had fallen upon in many a day. Then he became instinctively a
burrowing animal, and dug his way like a prairie-dog down among the sacks
and blankets, hiding himself from the cold air as snug and safe as a bear in his
den. For three nights sleep had visited Curly only in broken and shivering
doses. So now, when Morpheus condescended to pay him a call, Curly got
such a strangle hold on the mythological old gentleman that it was a wonder
that anyone else in the whole world got a wink of sleep that night.

Six cowpunchers of the Cibolo Ranch were waiting around the door of the
ranch store. Their ponies cropped grass near by, tied in the Texas fashion-which is not tied at all. Their bridle reins had been dropped to the earth, which
is a more effectual way of securing them (such is the power of habit and
imagination) than you could devise out of a half-inch rope and a live-oak tree.
These guardians of the cow lounged about, each with a brown cigarette paper
in his hand, and gently but unceasingly cursed Sam Revell, the storekeeper.
Sam stood in the door, snapping the red elastic bands on his pink madras
shirtsleeves and looking down affectionately at the only pair of tan shoes
within a forty-mile radius. His offence had been serious, and he was divided
between humble apology and admiration for the beauty of his raiment. He had
allowed the ranch stock of "smoking" to become exhausted.
"I thought sure there was another case of it under the counter, boys," he
explained. "But it happened to be catterdges."
"You've sure got a case of happenedicitis," said Poky Rodgers, fency rider of
the Largo Verde /potrero/. "Somebody ought to happen to give you a knock on
the head with the butt end of a quirt. I've rode in nine miles for some tobacco;
and it don't appear natural and seemly that you ought to be allowed to live."
"The boys was smokin' cut plug and dried mesquite leaves mixed when I left,"
sighed Mustang Taylor, horse wrangler of the Three Elm camp. "They'll be
lookin' for me back by nine. They'll be settin' up, with their papers ready to
roll a whiff of the real thing before bedtime. And I've got to tell 'em that this
pink-eyed, sheep-headed, sulphur- footed, shirt-waisted son of a calico
broncho, Sam Revell, hasn't got no tobacco on hand."
Gregorio Falcon, Mexican vaquero and best thrower of the rope on the Cibolo,
pushed his heavy, silver-embroidered straw sombrero back upon his thicket of
jet black curls, and scraped the bottoms of his pockets for a few crumbs of the
precious weed.
"Ah, Don Samuel," he said, reproachfully, but with his touch of Castilian
manners, "escuse me. Dthey say dthe jackrabbeet and dthe sheep have dthe
most leetle /sesos/--how you call dthem--brain-es? Ah don't believe dthat, Don
Samuel--escuse me. Ah dthink people w'at don't keep esmokin' tobacco,
dthey--bot you weel escuse me, Don Samuel."
"Now, what's the use of chewin' the rag, boys," said the untroubled Sam,
stooping over to rub the toes of his shoes with a red-and-yellow handkerchief.
"Ranse took the order for some more smokin' to San Antone with him
Tuesday. Pancho rode Ranse's hoss back yesterday; and Ranse is goin' to drive
the wagon back himself. There wa'n't much of a load--just some woolsacks
and blankets and nails and canned peaches and a few things we was out of. I
look for Ranse to roll in to-day sure. He's an early starter and a hell-to-split

driver, and he ought to be here not far from sundown."
"What plugs is he drivin'?" asked Mustang Taylor, with a smack of hope in his
tones.
"The buckboard greys," said Sam.
"I'll wait a spell, then," said the wrangler. "Them plugs eat up a trail like a
road-runner swallowin' a whip snake. And you may bust me open a can of
greengage plums, Sam, while I'm waitin' for somethin' better."
"Open me some yellow clings," ordered Poky Rodgers. "I'll wait, too."
The tobaccoless punchers arranged themselves comfortably on the steps of the
store. Inside Sam chopped open with a hatchet the tops of the cans of fruit.
The store, a big, white wooden building like a barn, stood fifty yards from the
ranch-house. Beyond it were the horse corrals; and still farther the wool sheds
and the brush-topped shearing pens--for the Rancho Cibolo raised both cattle
and sheep. Behind the store, at a little distance, were the grass-thatched /jacals/
of the Mexicans who bestowed their allegiance upon the Cibolo.
The ranch-house was composed of four large rooms, with plastered adobe
walls, and a two-room wooden ell. A twenty-feet-wide "gallery" circumvented
the structure. It was set in a grove of immense live-oaks and water-elms near a
lake--a long, not very wide, and tremendously deep lake in which at nightfall,
great gars leaped to the surface and plunged with the noise of hippopotamuses
frolicking at their bath. From the trees hung garlands and massive pendants of
the melancholy grey moss of the South. Indeed, the Cibolo ranch-house
seemed more of the South than of the West. It looked as if old "Kiowa"
Truesdell might have brought it with him from the lowlands of Mississippi
when he came to Texas with his rifle in the hollow of his arm in '55.
But, though he did not bring the family mansion, Truesdell did bring
something in the way of a family inheritance that was more lasting than brick
or stone. He brought one end of the Truesdell-Curtis family feud. And when a
Curtis bought the Rancho de los Olmos, sixteen miles from the Cibolo, there
were lively times on the pear flats and in the chaparral thickets off the
Southwest. In those days Truesdell cleaned the brush of many a wolf and tiger
cat and Mexican lion; and one or two Curtises fell heirs to notches on his rifle
stock. Also he buried a brother with a Curtis bullet in him on the bank of the
lake at Cibolo. And then the Kiowa Indians made their last raid upon the
ranches between the Frio and the Rio Grande, and Truesdell at the head of his
rangers rid the earth of them to the last brave, earning his sobriquet. Then
came prosperity in the form of waxing herds and broadening lands. And then
old age and bitterness, when he sat, with his great mane of hair as white as the
Spanish-dagger blossoms and his fierce, pale-blue eyes, on the shaded gallery
at Cibolo, growling like the pumas that he had slain. He snapped his fingers at

old age; the bitter taste to life did not come from that. The cup that stuck at his
lips was that his only son Ransom wanted to marry a Curtis, the last youthful
survivor of the other end of the feud.
For a while the only sounds to be heard at the store were the rattling of the tin
spoons and the gurgling intake of the juicy fruits by the cowpunchers, the
stamping of the grazing ponies, and the singing of a doleful song by Sam as he
contentedly brushed his stiff auburn hair for the twentieth time that day before
a crinkly mirror.
From the door of the store could be seen the irregular, sloping stretch of prairie
to the south, with its reaches of light-green, billowy mesquite flats in the lower
places, and its rises crowned with nearly black masses of short chaparral.
Through the mesquite flat wound the ranch road that, five miles away, flowed
into the old government trail to San Antonio. The sun was so low that the
gentlest elevation cast its grey shadow miles into the green-gold sea of
sunshine.
That evening ears were quicker than eyes.
The Mexican held up a tawny finger to still the scraping of tin against tin.
"One waggeen," said he, "cross dthe Arroyo Hondo. Ah hear dthe wheel.
Verree rockee place, dthe Hondo."
"You've got good ears, Gregorio," said Mustang Taylor. "I never heard nothin'
but the song-bird in the bush and the zephyr skallyhootin' across the peaceful
dell."
In ten minutes Taylor remarked: "I see the dust of a wagon risin' right above
the fur end of the flat."
"You have verree good eyes, senor," said Gregorio, smiling.
Two miles away they saw a faint cloud dimming the green ripples of the
mesquites. In twenty minutes they heard the clatter of the horses' hoofs: in five
minutes more the grey plugs dashed out of the thicket, whickering for oats and
drawing the light wagon behind them like a toy.
From the /jacals/ came a cry of: "El Amo! El Amo!" Four Mexican youths
raced to unharness the greys. The cowpunchers gave a yell of greeting and
delight.
Ranse Truesdell, driving, threw the reins to the ground and laughed.
"It's under the wagon sheet, boys," he said. "I know what you're waiting for. If
Sam lets it run out again we'll use those yellow shoes of his for a target.
There's two cases. Pull 'em out and light up. I know you all want a smoke."
After striking dry country Ranse had removed the wagon sheet from the bows

and thrown it over the goods in the wagon. Six pair of hasty hands dragged it
off and grabbled beneath the sacks and blankets for the cases of tobacco.
Long Collins, tobacco messenger from the San Gabriel outfit, who rode with
the longest stirrups west of the Mississippi, delved with an arm like the tongue
of a wagon. He caught something harder than a blanket and pulled out a
fearful thing--a shapeless, muddy bunch of leather tied together with wire and
twine. From its ragged end, like the head and claws of a disturbed turtle,
protruded human toes.
"Who-ee!" yelled Long Collins. "Ranse, are you a-packin' around of corpuses?
Here's a--howlin' grasshoppers!"
Up from his long slumber popped Curly, like some vile worm from its burrow.
He clawed his way out and sat blinking like a disreputable, drunken owl. His
face was as bluish-red and puffed and seamed and cross-lined as the cheapest
round steak of the butcher. His eyes were swollen slits; his nose a pickled beet;
his hair would have made the wildest thatch of a Jack-in-the-box look like the
satin poll of a Cleo de Merode. The rest of him was scarecrow done to the life.
Ranse jumped down from his seat and looked at his strange cargo with wideopen eyes.
"Here, you maverick, what are you doing in my wagon? How did you get in
there?"
The punchers gathered around in delight. For the time they had forgotten
tobacco.
Curly looked around him slowly in every direction. He snarled like a Scotch
terrier through his ragged beard.
"Where is this?" he rasped through his parched throat. "It's a damn farm in an
old field. What'd you bring me here for--say? Did I say I wanted to come here?
What are you Reubs rubberin' at--hey? G'wan or I'll punch some of yer faces."
"Drag him out, Collins," said Ranse.
Curly took a slide and felt the ground rise up and collide with his shoulder
blades. He got up and sat on the steps of the store shivering from outraged
nerves, hugging his knees and sneering. Taylor lifted out a case of tobacco and
wrenched off its top. Six cigarettes began to glow, bringing peace and
forgiveness to Sam.
"How'd you come in my wagon?" repeated Ranse, this time in a voice that
drew a reply.
Curly recognised the tone. He had heard it used by freight brakemen and large
persons in blue carrying clubs.
"Me?" he growled. "Oh, was you talkin' to me? Why, I was on my way to the

Menger, but my valet had forgot to pack my pyjamas. So I crawled into that
wagon in the wagon-yard--see? I never told you to bring me out to this
bloomin' farm--see?"
"What is it, Mustang?" asked Poky Rodgers, almost forgetting to smoke in his
ecstasy. "What do it live on?"
"It's a galliwampus, Poky," said Mustang. "It's the thing that hollers 'williwalloo' up in ellum trees in the low grounds of nights. I don't know if it bites."
"No, it ain't, Mustang," volunteered Long Collins. "Them galliwampuses has
fins on their backs, and eighteen toes. This here is a hicklesnifter. It lives
under the ground and eats cherries. Don't stand so close to it. It wipes out
villages with one stroke of its prehensile tail."
Sam, the cosmopolite, who called bartenders in San Antone by their first
name, stood in the door. He was a better zoologist.
"Well, ain't that a Willie for your whiskers?" he commented. "Where'd you dig
up the hobo, Ranse? Goin' to make an auditorium for inbreviates out of the
ranch?"
"Say," said Curly, from whose panoplied breast all shafts of wit fell blunted.
"Any of you kiddin' guys got a drink on you? Have your fun. Say, I've been
hittin' the stuff till I don't know straight up."
He turned to Ranse. "Say, you shanghaied me on your d--d old prairie
schooner--did I tell you to drive me to a farm? I want a drink. I'm goin' all to
little pieces. What's doin'?"
Ranse saw that the tramp's nerves were racking him. He despatched one of the
Mexican boys to the ranch-house for a glass of whisky. Curly gulped it down;
and into his eyes came a brief, grateful glow--as human as the expression in
the eye of a faithful setter dog.
"Thanky, boss," he said, quietly.
"You're thirty miles from a railroad, and forty miles from a saloon," said
Ranse.
Curly fell back weakly against the steps.
"Since you are here," continued the ranchman, "come along with me. We can't
turn you out on the prairie. A rabbit might tear you to pieces."
He conducted Curly to a large shed where the ranch vehicles were kept. There
he spread out a canvas cot and brought blankets.
"I don't suppose you can sleep," said Ranse, "since you've been pounding your
ear for twenty-four hours. But you can camp here till morning. I'll have Pedro
fetch you up some grub."

"Sleep!" said Curly. "I can sleep a week. Say, sport, have you got a coffin nail
on you?"
Fifty miles had Ransom Truesdell driven that day. And yet this is what he did.
Old "Kiowa" Truesdell sat in his great wicker chair reading by the light of an
immense oil lamp. Ranse laid a bundle of newspapers fresh from town at his
elbow.
"Back, Ranse?" said the old man, looking up.
"Son," old "Kiowa" continued, "I've been thinking all day about a certain
matter that we have talked about. I want you to tell me again. I've lived for
you. I've fought wolves and Indians and worse white men to protect you. You
never had any mother that you can remember. I've taught you to shoot straight,
ride hard, and live clean. Later on I've worked to pile up dollars that'll be
yours. You'll be a rich man, Ranse, when my chunk goes out. I've made you.
I've licked you into shape like a leopard cat licks its cubs. You don't belong to
yourself --you've got to be a Truesdell first. Now, is there to be any more
nonsense about this Curtis girl?"
"I'll tell you once more," said Ranse, slowly. "As I am a Truesdell and as you
are my father, I'll never marry a Curtis."
"Good boy," said old "Kiowa." "You'd better go get some supper."
Ranse went to the kitchen at the rear of the house. Pedro, the Mexican cook,
sprang up to bring the food he was keeping warm in the stove.
"Just a cup of coffee, Pedro," he said, and drank it standing. And then:
"There's a tramp on a cot in the wagon-shed. Take him something to eat.
Better make it enough for two."
Ranse walked out toward the /jacals/. A boy came running.
"Manuel, can you catch Vaminos, in the little pasture, for me?"
"Why not, senor? I saw him near the /puerta/ but two hours past. He bears a
drag-rope."
"Get him and saddle him as quick as you can."
"/Prontito, senor/."
Soon, mounted on Vaminos, Ranse leaned in the saddle, pressed with his
knees, and galloped eastward past the store, where sat Sam trying his guitar in
the moonlight.
Vaminos shall have a word--Vaminos the good dun horse. The Mexicans, who
have a hundred names for the colours of a horse, called him /gruyo/. He was a
mouse-coloured, slate-coloured, flea-bitten roan- dun, if you can conceive it.

Down his back from his mane to his tail went a line of black. He would live
forever; and surveyors have not laid off as many miles in the world as he
could travel in a day.
Eight miles east of the Cibolo ranch-house Ranse loosened the pressure of his
knees, and Vaminos stopped under a big ratama tree. The yellow ratama
blossoms showered fragrance that would have undone the roses of France. The
moon made the earth a great concave bowl with a crystal sky for a lid. In a
glade five jack-rabbits leaped and played together like kittens. Eight miles
farther east shone a faint star that appeared to have dropped below the horizon.
Night riders, who often steered their course by it, knew it to be the light in the
Rancho de los Olmos.
In ten minutes Yenna Curtis galloped to the tree on her sorrel pony Dancer.
The two leaned and clasped hands heartily.
"I ought to have ridden nearer your home," said Ranse. "But you never will let
me."
Yenna laughed. And in the soft light you could see her strong white teeth and
fearless eyes. No sentimentality there, in spite of the moonlight, the odour of
the ratamas, and the admirable figure of Ranse Truesdell, the lover. But she
was there, eight miles from her home, to meet him.
"How often have I told you, Ranse," she said, "that I am your half-way girl?
Always half-way."
"Well?" said Ranse, with a question in his tones.
"I did," said Yenna, with almost a sigh. "I told him after dinner when I thought
he would be in a good humour. Did you ever wake up a lion, Ranse, with the
mistaken idea that he would be a kitten? He almost tore the ranch to pieces.
It's all up. I love my daddy, Ranse, and I'm afraid--I'm afraid of him too. He
ordered me to promise that I'd never marry a Truesdell. I promised. That's all.
What luck did you have?"
"The same," said Ranse, slowly. "I promised him that his son would never
marry a Curtis. Somehow I couldn't go against him. He's mighty old. I'm sorry,
Yenna."
The girl leaned in her saddle and laid one hand on Ranse's, on the horn of his
saddle.
"I never thought I'd like you better for giving me up," she said ardently, "but I
do. I must ride back now, Ranse. I slipped out of the house and saddled Dancer
myself. Good-night, neighbour."
"Good-night," said Ranse. "Ride carefully over them badger holes."
They wheeled and rode away in opposite directions. Yenna turned in her

saddle and called clearly:
"Don't forget I'm your half-way girl, Ranse."
"Damn all family feuds and inherited scraps," muttered Ranse vindictively to
the breeze as he rode back to the Cibolo.
Ranse turned his horse into the small pasture and went to his own room. He
opened the lowest drawer of an old bureau to get out the packet of letters that
Yenna had written him one summer when she had gone to Mississippi for a
visit. The drawer stuck, and he yanked at it savagely--as a man will. It came
out of the bureau, and bruised both his shins--as a drawer will. An old, folded
yellow letter without an envelope fell from somewhere--probably from where
it had lodged in one of the upper drawers. Ranse took it to the lamp and read it
curiously.
Then he took his hat and walked to one of the Mexican /jacals/.
"Tia Juana," he said, "I would like to talk with you a while."
An old, old Mexican woman, white-haired and wonderfully wrinkled, rose
from a stool.
"Sit down," said Ranse, removing his hat and taking the one chair in the
/jacal/. "Who am I, Tia Juana?" he asked, speaking Spanish.
"Don Ransom, our good friend and employer. Why do you ask?" answered the
old woman wonderingly.
"Tia Juana, who am I?" he repeated, with his stern eyes looking into hers.
A frightened look came in the old woman's face. She fumbled with her black
shawl.
"Who am I, Tia Juana?" said Ranse once more.
"Thirty-two years I have lived on the Rancho Cibolo," said Tia Juana. "I
thought to be buried under the coma mott beyond the garden before these
things should be known. Close the door, Don Ransom, and I will speak. I see
in your face that you know."
An hour Ranse spent behind Tia Juana's closed door. As he was on his way
back to the house Curly called to him from the wagon-shed.
The tramp sat on his cot, swinging his feet and smoking.
"Say, sport," he grumbled. "This is no way to treat a man after kidnappin' him.
I went up to the store and borrowed a razor from that fresh guy and had a
shave. But that ain't all a man needs. Say--can't you loosen up for about three
fingers more of that booze? I never asked you to bring me to your d--d farm."
"Stand up out here in the light," said Ranse, looking at him closely.
Curly got up sullenly and took a step or two.

His face, now shaven smooth, seemed transformed. His hair had been combed,
and it fell back from the right side of his forehead with a peculiar wave. The
moonlight charitably softened the ravages of drink; and his aquiline, wellshaped nose and small, square cleft chin almost gave distinction to his looks.
Ranse sat on the foot of the cot and looked at him curiously.
"Where did you come from--have you got any home or folks anywhere?"
"Me? Why, I'm a dook," said Curly. "I'm Sir Reginald--oh, cheese it. No; I
don't know anything about my ancestors. I've been a tramp ever since I can
remember. Say, old pal, are you going to set 'em up again to-night or not?"
"You answer my questions and maybe I will. How did you come to be a
tramp?"
"Me?" answered Curly. "Why, I adopted that profession when I was an infant.
Case of had to. First thing I can remember, I belonged to a big, lazy hobo
called Beefsteak Charley. He sent me around to houses to beg. I wasn't hardly
big enough to reach the latch of a gate."
"Did he ever tell you how he got you?" asked Ranse.
"Once when he was sober he said he bought me for an old six-shooter and six
bits from a band of drunken Mexican sheep-shearers. But what's the diff?
That's all I know."
"All right," said Ranse. "I reckon you're a maverick for certain. I'm going to
put the Rancho Cibolo brand on you. I'll start you to work in one of the camps
to-morrow."
"Work!" sniffed Curly, disdainfully. "What do you take me for? Do you think
I'd chase cows, and hop-skip-and-jump around after crazy sheep like that pink
and yellow guy at the store says these Reubs do? Forget it."
"Oh, you'll like it when you get used to it," said Ranse. "Yes, I'll send you up
one more drink by Pedro. I think you'll make a first-class cowpuncher before I
get through with you."
"Me?" said Curly. "I pity the cows you set me to chaperon. They can go chase
themselves. Don't forget my nightcap, please, boss."
Ranse paid a visit to the store before going to the house. Sam Rivell was
taking off his tan shoes regretting and preparing for bed.
"Any of the boys from the San Gabriel camp riding in early in the morning?"
asked Ranse.
"Long Collins," said Sam briefly. "For the mail."
"Tell him," said Ranse, "to take that tramp out to camp with him and keep him
till I get there."

Curly was sitting on his blankets in the San Gabriel camp cursing talentedly
when Ranse Truesdell rode up and dismounted on the next afternoon. The
cowpunchers were ignoring the stray. He was grimy with dust and black dirt.
His clothes were making their last stand in favour of the conventions.
Ranse went up to Buck Rabb, the camp boss, and spoke briefly.
"He's a plumb buzzard," said Buck. "He won't work, and he's the low- downest
passel of inhumanity I ever see. I didn't know what you wanted done with him,
Ranse, so I just let him set. That seems to suit him. He's been condemned to
death by the boys a dozen times, but I told 'em maybe you was savin' him for
the torture."
Ranse took off his coat.
"I've got a hard job before me, Buck, I reckon, but it has to be done. I've got to
make a man out of that thing. That's what I've come to camp for."
He went up to Curly.
"Brother," he said, "don't you think if you had a bath it would allow you to
take a seat in the company of your fellow-man with less injustice to the
atmosphere."
"Run away, farmer," said Curly, sardonically. "Willie will send for nursey
when he feels like having his tub."
The /charco/, or water hole, was twelve yards away. Ranse took one of Curly's
ankles and dragged him like a sack of potatoes to the brink. Then with the
strength and sleight of a hammer-throw he hurled the offending member of
society far into the lake.
Curly crawled out and up the bank spluttering like a porpoise.
Ranse met him with a piece of soap and a coarse towel in his hands.
"Go to the other end of the lake and use this," he said. "Buck will give you
some dry clothes at the wagon."
The tramp obeyed without protest. By the time supper was ready he had
returned to camp. He was hardly to be recognised in his new shirt and brown
duck clothes. Ranse observed him out of the corner of his eye.
"Lordy, I hope he ain't a coward," he was saying to himself. "I hope he won't
turn out to be a coward."
His doubts were soon allayed. Curly walked straight to where he stood. His
light-blue eyes were blazing.
"Now I'm clean," he said meaningly, "maybe you'll talk to me. Think you've
got a picnic here, do you? You clodhoppers think you can run over a man
because you know he can't get away. All right. Now, what do you think of

that?"
Curly planted a stinging slap against Ranse's left cheek. The print of his hand
stood out a dull red against the tan.
Ranse smiled happily.
The cowpunchers talk to this day of the battle that followed.
Somewhere in his restless tour of the cities Curly had acquired the art of selfdefence. The ranchman was equipped only with the splendid strength and
equilibrium of perfect health and the endurance conferred by decent living.
The two attributes nearly matched. There were no formal rounds. At last the
fibre of the clean liver prevailed. The last time Curly went down from one of
the ranchman's awkward but powerful blows he remained on the grass, but
looking up with an unquenched eye.
Ranse went to the water barrel and washed the red from a cut on his chin in
the stream from the faucet.
On his face was a grin of satisfaction.
Much benefit might accrue to educators and moralists if they could know the
details of the curriculum of reclamation through which Ranse put his waif
during the month that he spent in the San Gabriel camp. The ranchman had no
fine theories to work out--perhaps his whole stock of pedagogy embraced only
a knowledge of horse-breaking and a belief in heredity.
The cowpunchers saw that their boss was trying to make a man out of the
strange animal that he had sent among them; and they tacitly organised
themselves into a faculty of assistants. But their system was their own.
Curly's first lesson stuck. He became on friendly and then on intimate terms
with soap and water. And the thing that pleased Ranse most was that his
"subject" held his ground at each successive higher step. But the steps were
sometimes far apart.
Once he got at the quart bottle of whisky kept sacredly in the grub tent for
rattlesnake bites, and spent sixteen hours on the grass, magnificently drunk.
But when he staggered to his feet his first move was to find his soap and towel
and start for the /charco/. And once, when a treat came from the ranch in the
form of a basket of fresh tomatoes and young onions, Curly devoured the
entire consignment before the punchers reached the camp at supper time.
And then the punchers punished him in their own way. For three days they did
not speak to him, except to reply to his own questions or remarks. And they
spoke with absolute and unfailing politeness. They played tricks on one
another; they pounded one another hurtfully and affectionately; they heaped
upon one another's heads friendly curses and obloquy; but they were polite to
Curly. He saw it, and it stung him as much as Ranse hoped it would.

Then came a night that brought a cold, wet norther. Wilson, the youngest of
the outfit, had lain in camp two days, ill with fever. When Joe got up at
daylight to begin breakfast he found Curly sitting asleep against a wheel of the
grub wagon with only a saddle blanket around him, while Curly's blankets
were stretched over Wilson to protect him from the rain and wind.
Three nights after that Curly rolled himself in his blanket and went to sleep.
Then the other punchers rose up softly and began to make preparations. Ranse
saw Long Collins tie a rope to the horn of a saddle. Others were getting out
their six-shooters.
"Boys," said Ranse, "I'm much obliged. I was hoping you would. But I didn't
like to ask."
Half a dozen six-shooters began to pop--awful yells rent the air--Long Collins
galloped wildly across Curly's bed, dragging the saddle after him. That was
merely their way of gently awaking their victim. Then they hazed him for an
hour, carefully and ridiculously, after the code of cow camps. Whenever he
uttered protest they held him stretched over a roll of blankets and thrashed him
woefully with a pair of leather leggings.
And all this meant that Curly had won his spurs, that he was receiving the
puncher's accolade. Nevermore would they be polite to him. But he would be
their "pardner" and stirrup-brother, foot to foot.
When the fooling was ended all hands made a raid on Joe's big coffee- pot by
the fire for a Java nightcap. Ranse watched the new knight carefully to see if
he understood and was worthy. Curly limped with his cup of coffee to a log
and sat upon it. Long Collins followed and sat by his side. Buck Rabb went
and sat at the other. Curly--grinned.
And then Ranse furnished Curly with mounts and saddle and equipment, and
turned him over to Buck Rabb, instructing him to finish the job.
Three weeks later Ranse rode from the ranch into Rabb's camp, which was
then in Snake Valley. The boys were saddling for the day's ride. He sought out
Long Collins among them.
"How about that bronco?" he asked.
Long Collins grinned.
"Reach out your hand, Ranse Truesdell," he said, "and you'll touch him. And
you can shake his'n, too, if you like, for he's plumb white and there's none
better in no camp."
Ranse looked again at the clear-faced, bronzed, smiling cowpuncher who
stood at Collins's side. Could that be Curly? He held out his hand, and Curly
grasped it with the muscles of a bronco-buster.

"I want you at the ranch," said Ranse.
"All right, sport," said Curly, heartily. "But I want to come back again. Say,
pal, this is a dandy farm. And I don't want any better fun than hustlin' cows
with this bunch of guys. They're all to the merry- merry."
At the Cibolo ranch-house they dismounted. Ranse bade Curly wait at the door
of the living room. He walked inside. Old "Kiowa" Truesdell was reading at a
table.
"Good-morning, Mr. Truesdell," said Ranse.
The old man turned his white head quickly.
"How is this?" he began. "Why do you call me 'Mr.--'?"
When he looked at Ranse's face he stopped, and the hand that held his
newspaper shook slightly.
"Boy," he said slowly, "how did you find it out?"
"It's all right," said Ranse, with a smile. "I made Tia Juana tell me. It was kind
of by accident, but it's all right."
"You've been like a son to me," said old "Kiowa," trembling.
"Tia Juana told me all about it," said Ranse. "She told me how you adopted me
when I was knee-high to a puddle duck out of a wagon train of prospectors
that was bound West. And she told me how the kid--your own kid, you know-got lost or was run away with. And she said it was the same day that the
sheep-shearers got on a bender and left the ranch."
"Our boy strayed from the house when he was two years old," said the old
man. "And then along came those emigrant wagons with a youngster they
didn't want; and we took you. I never intended you to know, Ranse. We never
heard of our boy again."
"He's right outside, unless I'm mighty mistaken," said Ranse, opening the door
and beckoning.
Curly walked in.
No one could have doubted. The old man and the young had the same sweep
of hair, the same nose, chin, line of face, and prominent light- blue eyes.
Old "Kiowa" rose eagerly.
Curly looked about the room curiously. A puzzled expression came over his
face. He pointed to the wall opposite.
"Where's the tick-tock?" he asked, absent-mindedly.
"The clock," cried old "Kiowa" loudly. "The eight-day clock used to stand
there. Why--"

He turned to Ranse, but Ranse was not there.
Already a hundred yards away, Vaminos, the good flea-bitten dun, was bearing
him eastward like a racer through dust and chaparral towards the Rancho de
los Olmos.

X
CUPID A LA CARTE
"The dispositions of woman," said Jeff Peters, after various opinions on the
subject had been advanced, "run, regular, to diversions. What a woman wants
is what you're out of. She wants more of a thing when it's scarce. She likes to
have souvenirs of things that never happened. She likes to be reminded of
things she never heard of. A one-sided view of objects is disjointing to the
female composition.
"'Tis a misfortune of mine, begotten by nature and travel," continued Jeff,
looking thoughtfully between his elevated feet at the grocery stove, "to look
deeper into some subjects than most people do. I've breathed gasoline smoke
talking to street crowds in nearly every town in the United States. I've held 'em
spellbound with music, oratory, sleight of hand, and prevarications, while I've
sold 'em jewelry, medicine, soap, hair tonic, and junk of other nominations.
And during my travels, as a matter of recreation and expiation, I've taken
cognisance some of women. It takes a man a lifetime to find out about one
particular woman; but if he puts in, say, ten years, industrious and curious, he
can acquire the general rudiments of the sex. One lesson I picked up was when
I was working the West with a line of Brazilian diamonds and a patent fire
kindler just after my trip from Savannah down through the cotton belt with
Dalby's Anti-explosive Lamp Oil Powder. 'Twas when the Oklahoma country
was in first bloom. Guthrie was rising in the middle of it like a lump of selfraising dough. It was a boom town of the regular kind--you stood in line to get
a chance to wash your face; if you ate over ten minutes you had a lodging bill
added on; if you slept on a plank at night they charged it to you as board the
next morning.
"By nature and doctrines I am addicted to the habit of discovering choice
places wherein to feed. So I looked around and found a proposition that
exactly cut the mustard. I found a restaurant tent just opened up by an outfit
that had drifted in on the tail of the boom. They had knocked together a box
house, where they lived and did the cooking, and served the meals in a tent
pitched against the side. That tent was joyful with placards on it calculated to
redeem the world-worn pilgrim from the sinfulness of boarding houses and

pick-me- up hotels. 'Try Mother's Home-Made Biscuits,' 'What's the Matter
with Our Apple Dumplings and Hard Sauce?' 'Hot Cakes and Maple Syrup
Like You Ate When a Boy,' 'Our Fried Chicken Never Was Heard to Crow'-there was literature doomed to please the digestions of man! I said to myself
that mother's wandering boy should munch there that night. And so it came to
pass. And there is where I contracted my case of Mame Dugan.
"Old Man Dugan was six feet by one of Indiana loafer, and he spent his time
sitting on his shoulder blades in a rocking-chair in the shanty memorialising
the great corn-crop failure of '96. Ma Dugan did the cooking, and Mame
waited on the table.
"As soon as I saw Mame I knew there was a mistake in the census reports.
There wasn't but one girl in the United States. When you come to
specifications it isn't easy. She was about the size of an angel, and she had
eyes, and ways about her. When you come to the kind of a girl she was, you'll
find a belt of 'em reaching from the Brooklyn Bridge west as far as the
courthouse in Council Bluffs, Ia. They earn their own living in stores,
restaurants, factories, and offices. They're chummy and honest and free and
tender and sassy, and they look life straight in the eye. They've met man face
to face, and discovered that he's a poor creature. They've dropped to it that the
reports in the Seaside Library about his being a fairy prince lack confirmation.
"Mame was that sort. She was full of life and fun, and breezy; she passed the
repartee with the boarders quick as a wink; you'd have smothered laughing. I
am disinclined to make excavations into the insides of a personal affection. I
am glued to the theory that the diversions and discrepancies of the
indisposition known as love should be as private a sentiment as a toothbrush.
'Tis my opinion that the biographies of the heart should be confined with the
historical romances of the liver to the advertising pages of the magazines. So,
you'll excuse the lack of an itemised bill of my feelings toward Mame.
"Pretty soon I got a regular habit of dropping into the tent to eat at irregular
times when there wasn't so many around. Mame would sail in with a smile, in
a black dress and white apron, and say: 'Hello, Jeff --why don't you come at
mealtime? Want to see how much trouble you can be, of course.
Friedchickenbeefsteakporkchopshamandeggspotpie'--and so on. She called me
Jeff, but there was no significations attached. Designations was all she meant.
The front names of any of us she used as they came to hand. I'd eat about two
meals before I left, and string 'em out like a society spread where they changed
plates and wives, and josh one another festively between bites. Mame stood
for it, pleasant, for it wasn't up to her to take any canvas off the tent by
declining dollars just because they were whipped in after meal times.
"It wasn't long until there was another fellow named Ed Collier got the
between-meals affliction, and him and me put in bridges between breakfast

and dinner, and dinner and supper, that made a three-ringed circus of that tent,
and Mame's turn as waiter a continuous performance. That Collier man was
saturated with designs and contrivings. He was in well-boring or insurance or
claim-jumping, or something--I've forgotten which. He was a man well
lubricated with gentility, and his words were such as recommended you to his
point of view. So, Collier and me infested the grub tent with care and activity.
Mame was level full of impartiality. 'Twas like a casino hand the way she dealt
out her favours--one to Collier and one to me and one to the board, and not a
card up her sleeve.
"Me and Collier naturally got acquainted, and gravitated together some on the
outside. Divested of his stratagems, he seemed to be a pleasant chap, full of an
amiable sort of hostility.
"'I notice you have an affinity for grubbing in the banquet hall after the guests
have fled,' says I to him one day, to draw his conclusions.
"'Well, yes,' says Collier, reflecting; 'the tumult of a crowded board seems to
harass my sensitive nerves.'
"'It exasperates mine some, too,' says I. 'Nice little girl, don't you think?'
"'I see,' says Collier, laughing. 'Well, now that you mention it, I have noticed
that she doesn't seem to displease the optic nerve.'
"'She's a joy to mine,' says I, 'and I'm going after her. Notice is hereby served.'
"'I'll be as candid as you,' admits Collier, 'and if the drug stores don't run out of
pepsin I'll give you a run for your money that'll leave you a dyspeptic at the
wind-up.'
"So Collier and me begins the race; the grub department lays in new supplies;
Mame waits on us, jolly and kind and agreeable, and it looks like an even
break, with Cupid and the cook working overtime in Dugan's restaurant.
"'Twas one night in September when I got Mame to take a walk after supper
when the things were all cleared away. We strolled out a distance and sat on a
pile of lumber at the edge of town. Such opportunities was seldom, so I spoke
my piece, explaining how the Brazilian diamonds and the fire kindler were
laying up sufficient treasure to guarantee the happiness of two, and that both
of 'em together couldn't equal the light from somebody's eyes, and that the
name of Dugan should be changed to Peters, or reasons why not would be in
order.
"Mame didn't say anything right away. Directly she gave a kind of shudder,
and I began to learn something.
"'Jeff,' she says, 'I'm sorry you spoke. I like you as well as any of them, but
there isn't a man in the world I'd ever marry, and there never will be. Do you
know what a man is in my eye? He's a tomb. He's a sarcophagus for the

interment of Beafsteakporkchopsliver'nbaconham- andeggs. He's that and
nothing more. For two years I've watched men eat, eat, eat, until they represent
nothing on earth to me but ruminant bipeds. They're absolutely nothing but
something that goes in front of a knife and fork and plate at the table. They're
fixed that way in my mind and memory. I've tried to overcome it, but I can't.
I've heard girls rave about their sweethearts, but I never could understand it. A
man and a sausage grinder and a pantry awake in me exactly the same
sentiments. I went to a matinee once to see an actor the girls were crazy about.
I got interested enough to wonder whether he liked his steak rare, medium, or
well done, and his eggs over or straight up. That was all. No, Jeff; I'll marry no
man and see him sit at the breakfast table and eat, and come back to dinner
and eat, and happen in again at supper to eat, eat, eat.'
"'But, Mame,' says I, 'it'll wear off. You've had too much of it. You'll marry
some time, of course. Men don't eat always.'
"'As far as my observation goes, they do. No, I'll tell you what I'm going to
do.' Mame turns, sudden, to animation and bright eyes. 'There's a girl named
Susie Foster in Terre Haute, a chum of mine. She waits in the railroad eating
house there. I worked two years in a restaurant in that town. Susie has it worse
than I do, because the men who eat at railroad stations gobble. They try to flirt
and gobble at the same time. Whew! Susie and I have it all planned out. We're
saving our money, and when we get enough we're going to buy a little cottage
and five acres we know of, and live together, and grow violets for the Eastern
market. A man better not bring his appetite within a mile of that ranch.'
"'Don't girls ever--' I commenced, but Mame heads me off, sharp.
"'No, they don't. They nibble a little bit sometimes; that's all.'
"'I thought the confect--'
"'For goodness' sake, change the subject,' says Mame.
"As I said before, that experience puts me wise that the feminine arrangement
ever struggles after deceptions and illusions. Take England--beef made her;
wieners elevated Germany; Uncle Sam owes his greatness to fried chicken and
pie, but the young ladies of the Shetalkyou schools, they'll never believe it.
Shakespeare, they allow, and Rubinstein, and the Rough Riders is what did the
trick.
"'Twas a situation calculated to disturb. I couldn't bear to give up Mame; and
yet it pained me to think of abandoning the practice of eating. I had acquired
the habit too early. For twenty-seven years I had been blindly rushing upon my
fate, yielding to the insidious lures of that deadly monster, food. It was too
late. I was a ruminant biped for keeps. It was lobster salad to a doughnut that
my life was going to be blighted by it.

"I continued to board at the Dugan tent, hoping that Mame would relent. I had
sufficient faith in true love to believe that since it has often outlived the
absence of a square meal it might, in time, overcome the presence of one. I
went on ministering to my fatal vice, although I felt that each time I shoved a
potato into my mouth in Mame's presence I might be burying my fondest
hopes.
"I think Collier must have spoken to Mame and got the same answer, for one
day he orders a cup of coffee and a cracker, and sits nibbling the corner of it
like a girl in the parlour, that's filled up in the kitchen, previous, on cold roast
and fried cabbage. I caught on and did the same, and maybe we thought we'd
made a hit! The next day we tried it again, and out comes old man Dugan
fetching in his hands the fairy viands.
"'Kinder off yer feed, ain't ye, gents?' he asks, fatherly and some sardonic.
'Thought I'd spell Mame a bit, seein' the work was light, and my rheumatiz can
stand the strain.'
"So back me and Collier had to drop to the heavy grub again. I noticed about
that time that I was seized by a most uncommon and devastating appetite. I ate
until Mame must have hated to see me darken the door. Afterward I found out
that I had been made the victim of the first dark and irreligious trick played on
me by Ed Collier. Him and me had been taking drinks together uptown
regular, trying to drown our thirst for food. That man had bribed about ten
bartenders to always put a big slug of Appletree's Anaconda Appetite Bitters
in every one of my drinks. But the last trick he played me was hardest to
forget.
"One day Collier failed to show up at the tent. A man told me he left town that
morning. My only rival now was the bill of fare. A few days before he left
Collier had presented me with a two-gallon jug of fine whisky which he said a
cousin had sent him from Kentucky. I now have reason to believe that it
contained Appletree's Anaconda Appetite Bitters almost exclusively. I
continued to devour tons of provisions. In Mame's eyes I remained a mere
biped, more ruminant than ever.
"About a week after Collier pulled his freight there came a kind of side-show
to town, and hoisted a tent near the railroad. I judged it was a sort of fake
museum and curiosity business. I called to see Mame one night, and Ma
Dugan said that she and Thomas, her younger brother, had gone to the show.
That same thing happened for three nights that week. Saturday night I caught
her on the way coming back, and got to sit on the steps a while and talk to her.
I noticed she looked different. Her eyes were softer, and shiny like. Instead of
a Mame Dugan to fly from the voracity of man and raise violets, she seemed
to be a Mame more in line as God intended her, approachable, and suited to
bask in the light of the Brazilians and the Kindler.

"'You seem to be right smart inveigled,' says I, 'with the Unparalleled
Exhibition of the World's Living Curiosities and Wonders.'
"'It's a change,' says Mame.
"'You'll need another,' says I, 'if you keep on going every night.'
"'Don't be cross, Jeff,' says she; 'it takes my mind off business.'
"'Don't the curiosities eat?' I ask.
"'Not all of them. Some of them are wax.'
"'Look out, then, that you don't get stuck,' says I, kind of flip and foolish.
"Mame blushed. I didn't know what to think about her. My hopes raised some
that perhaps my attentions had palliated man's awful crime of visibly
introducing nourishment into his system. She talked some about the stars,
referring to them with respect and politeness, and I drivelled a quantity about
united hearts, homes made bright by true affection, and the Kindler. Mame
listened without scorn, and I says to myself, 'Jeff, old man, you're removing
the hoodoo that has clung to the consumer of victuals; you're setting your heel
upon the serpent that lurks in the gravy bowl.'
"Monday night I drop around. Mame is at the Unparalleled Exhibition with
Thomas.
"'Now, may the curse of the forty-one seven-sided sea cooks,' says I, 'and the
bad luck of the nine impenitent grasshoppers rest upon this self-same
sideshow at once and forever more. Amen. I'll go to see it myself to-morrow
night and investigate its baleful charm. Shall man that was made to inherit the
earth be bereft of his sweetheart first by a knife and fork and then by a ten-cent
circus?'
"The next night before starting out for the exhibition tent I inquire and find out
that Mame is not at home. She is not at the circus with Thomas this time, for
Thomas waylays me in the grass outside of the grub tent with a scheme of his
own before I had time to eat supper.
"'What'll you give me, Jeff,' says he, 'if I tell you something?'
"'The value of it, son,' I says.
"'Sis is stuck on a freak,' says Thomas, 'one of the side-show freaks. I don't
like him. She does. I overheard 'em talking. Thought maybe you'd like to
know. Say, Jeff, does it put you wise two dollars' worth? There's a target rifle
up town that--'
"I frisked my pockets and commenced to dribble a stream of halves and
quarters into Thomas's hat. The information was of the pile-driver system of
news, and it telescoped my intellects for a while. While I was leaking small
change and smiling foolish on the outside, and suffering disturbances

internally, I was saying, idiotically and pleasantly:
"'Thank you, Thomas--thank you--er--a freak, you said, Thomas. Now, could
you make out the monstrosity's entitlements a little clearer, if you please,
Thomas?'
"'This is the fellow,' says Thomas, pulling out a yellow handbill from his
pocket and shoving it under my nose. 'He's the Champion Faster of the
Universe. I guess that's why Sis got soft on him. He don't eat nothing. He's
going to fast forty-nine days. This is the sixth. That's him.'
"I looked at the name Thomas pointed out--'Professor Eduardo Collieri.' 'Ah!'
says I, in admiration, 'that's not so bad, Ed Collier. I give you credit for the
trick. But I don't give you the girl until she's Mrs. Freak.'
"I hit the sod in the direction of the show. I came up to the rear of the tent, and,
as I did so, a man wiggled out like a snake from under the bottom of the
canvas, scrambled to his feet, and ran into me like a locoed bronco. I gathered
him by the neck and investigated him by the light of the stars. It is Professor
Eduardo Collieri, in human habiliments, with a desperate look in one eye and
impatience in the other.
"'Hello, Curiosity,' says I. 'Get still a minute and let's have a look at your
freakship. How do you like being the willopus-wallopus or the bim-bam from
Borneo, or whatever name you are denounced by in the side-show business?'
"'Jeff Peters,' says Collier, in a weak voice. 'Turn me loose, or I'll slug you one.
I'm in the extremest kind of a large hurry. Hands off!'
"'Tut, tut, Eddie,' I answers, holding him hard; 'let an old friend gaze on the
exhibition of your curiousness. It's an eminent graft you fell onto, my son. But
don't speak of assaults and battery, because you're not fit. The best you've got
is a lot of nerve and a mighty empty stomach.' And so it was. The man was as
weak as a vegetarian cat.
"'I'd argue this case with you, Jeff,' says he, regretful in his style, 'for an
unlimited number of rounds if I had half an hour to train in and a slab of
beefsteak two feet square to train with. Curse the man, I say, that invented the
art of going foodless. May his soul in eternity be chained up within two feet of
a bottomless pit of red- hot hash. I'm abandoning the conflict, Jeff; I'm
deserting to the enemy. You'll find Miss Dugan inside contemplating the only
living mummy and the informed hog. She's a fine girl, Jeff. I'd have beat you
out if I could have kept up the grubless habit a little while longer. You'll have
to admit that the fasting dodge was aces-up for a while. I figured it out that
way. But say, Jeff, it's said that love makes the world go around. Let me tell
you, the announcement lacks verification. It's the wind from the dinner horn
that does it. I love that Mame Dugan. I've gone six days without food in order
to coincide with her sentiments. Only one bite did I have. That was when I

knocked the tattooed man down with a war club and got a sandwich he was
gobbling. The manager fined me all my salary; but salary wasn't what I was
after. 'Twas that girl. I'd give my life for her, but I'd endanger my immortal
soul for a beef stew. Hunger is a horrible thing, Jeff. Love and business and
family and religion and art and patriotism are nothing but shadows of words
when a man's starving!'
"In such language Ed Collier discoursed to me, pathetic. I gathered the
diagnosis that his affections and his digestions had been implicated in a
scramble and the commissary had won out. I never disliked Ed Collier. I
searched my internal admonitions of suitable etiquette to see if I could find a
remark of a consoling nature, but there was none convenient.
"'I'd be glad, now,' says Ed, 'if you'll let me go. I've been hard hit, but I'll hit
the ration supply harder. I'm going to clean out every restaurant in town. I'm
going to wade waist deep in sirloins and swim in ham and eggs. It's an awful
thing, Jeff Peters, for a man to come to this pass--to give up his girl for
something to eat--it's worse than that man Esau, that swapped his copyright for
a partridge-- but then, hunger's a fierce thing. You'll excuse me, now, Jeff, for I
smell a pervasion of ham frying in the distance, and my legs are crying out to
stampede in that direction.'
"'A hearty meal to you, Ed Collier,' I says to him, 'and no hard feelings. For
myself, I am projected to be an unseldom eater, and I have condolence for
your predicaments.'
"There was a sudden big whiff of frying ham smell on the breeze; and the
Champion Faster gives a snort and gallops off in the dark toward fodder.
"I wish some of the cultured outfit that are always advertising the extenuating
circumstances of love and romance had been there to see. There was Ed
Collier, a fine man full of contrivances and flirtations, abandoning the girl of
his heart and ripping out into the contiguous territory in the pursuit of sordid
grub. 'Twas a rebuke to the poets and a slap at the best-paying element of
fiction. An empty stomach is a sure antidote to an overfull heart.
"I was naturally anxious to know how far Mame was infatuated with Collier
and his stratagems. I went inside the Unparalleled Exhibition, and there she
was. She looked surprised to see me, but unguilty.
"'It's an elegant evening outside,' says I. 'The coolness is quite nice and
gratifying, and the stars are lined out, first class, up where they belong.
Wouldn't you shake these by-products of the animal kingdom long enough to
take a walk with a common human who never was on a programme in his
life?'
"Mame gave a sort of sly glance around, and I knew what that meant.

"'Oh,' says I, 'I hate to tell you; but the curiosity that lives on wind has flew the
coop. He just crawled out under the tent. By this time he has amalgamated
himself with half the delicatessen truck in town.'
"'You mean Ed Collier?' says Mame.
"'I do,' I answers; 'and a pity it is that he has gone back to crime again. I met
him outside the tent, and he exposed his intentions of devastating the food
crop of the world. 'Tis enormously sad when one's ideal descends from his
pedestal to make a seventeen-year locust of himself.'
"Mame looked me straight in the eye until she had corkscrewed my
reflections.
"'Jeff,' says she, 'it isn't quite like you to talk that way. I don't care to hear Ed
Collier ridiculed. A man may do ridiculous things, but they don't look
ridiculous to the girl he does 'em for. That was one man in a hundred. He
stopped eating just to please me. I'd be hard- hearted and ungrateful if I didn't
feel kindly toward him. Could you do what he did?'
"'I know,' says I, seeing the point, 'I'm condemned. I can't help it. The brand of
the consumer is upon my brow. Mrs. Eve settled that business for me when she
made the dicker with the snake. I fell from the fire into the frying-pan. I guess
I'm the Champion Feaster of the Universe.' I spoke humble, and Mame
mollified herself a little.
"'Ed Collier and I are good friends,' she said, 'the same as me and you. I gave
him the same answer I did you--no marrying for me. I liked to be with Ed and
talk with him. There was something mighty pleasant to me in the thought that
here was a man who never used a knife and fork, and all for my sake.'
"'Wasn't you in love with him?' I asks, all injudicious. 'Wasn't there a deal on
for you to become Mrs. Curiosity?'
"All of us do it sometimes. All of us get jostled out of the line of profitable
talk now and then. Mame put on that little lemon /glace/ smile that runs
between ice and sugar, and says, much too pleasant: 'You're short on
credentials for asking that question, Mr. Peters. Suppose you do a forty-nine
day fast, just to give you ground to stand on, and then maybe I'll answer it.'
"So, even after Collier was kidnapped out of the way by the revolt of his
appetite, my own prospects with Mame didn't seem to be improved. And then
business played out in Guthrie.
"I had stayed too long there. The Brazilians I had sold commenced to show
signs of wear, and the Kindler refused to light up right frequent on wet
mornings. There is always a time, in my business, when the star of success
says, 'Move on to the next town.' I was travelling by wagon at that time so as
not to miss any of the small towns; so I hitched up a few days later and went

down to tell Mame good-bye. I wasn't abandoning the game; I intended
running over to Oklahoma City and work it for a week or two. Then I was
coming back to institute fresh proceedings against Mame.
"What do I find at the Dugans' but Mame all conspicuous in a blue travelling
dress, with her little trunk at the door. It seems that sister Lottie Bell, who is a
typewriter in Terre Haute, is going to be married next Thursday, and Mame is
off for a week's visit to be an accomplice at the ceremony. Mame is waiting for
a freight wagon that is going to take her to Oklahoma, but I condemns the
freight wagon with promptness and scorn, and offers to deliver the goods
myself. Ma Dugan sees no reason why not, as Mr. Freighter wants pay for the
job; so, thirty minutes later Mame and I pull out in my light spring wagon with
white canvas cover, and head due south.
"That morning was of a praiseworthy sort. The breeze was lively, and smelled
excellent of flowers and grass, and the little cottontail rabbits entertained
themselves with skylarking across the road. My two Kentucky bays went for
the horizon until it come sailing in so fast you wanted to dodge it like a
clothesline. Mame was full of talk and rattled on like a kid about her old home
and her school pranks and the things she liked and the hateful ways of those
Johnson girls just across the street, 'way up in Indiana. Not a word was said
about Ed Collier or victuals or such solemn subjects. About noon Mame looks
and finds that the lunch she had put up in a basket had been left behind. I
could have managed quite a collation, but Mame didn't seem to be grieving
over nothing to eat, so I made no lamentations. It was a sore subject with me,
and I ruled provender in all its branches out of my conversation.
"I am minded to touch light on explanations how I came to lose the way. The
road was dim and well grown with grass; and there was Mame by my side
confiscating my intellects and attention. The excuses are good or they are not,
as they may appear to you. But I lost it, and at dusk that afternoon, when we
should have been in Oklahoma City, we were seesawing along the edge of
nowhere in some undiscovered river bottom, and the rain was falling in large,
wet bunches. Down there in the swamps we saw a little log house on a small
knoll of high ground. The bottom grass and the chaparral and the lonesome
timber crowded all around it. It seemed to be a melancholy little house, and
you felt sorry for it. 'Twas that house for the night, the way I reasoned it. I
explained to Mame, and she leaves it to me to decide. She doesn't become
galvanic and prosecuting, as most women would, but she says it's all right; she
knows I didn't mean to do it.
"We found the house was deserted. It had two empty rooms. There was a little
shed in the yard where beasts had once been kept. In a loft of it was a lot of
old hay. I put my horses in there and gave them some of it, for which they
looked at me sorrowful, expecting apologies. The rest of the hay I carried into

the house by armfuls, with a view to accommodations. I also brought in the
patent kindler and the Brazilians, neither of which are guaranteed against the
action of water.
"Mame and I sat on the wagon seats on the floor, and I lit a lot of the kindler
on the hearth, for the night was chilly. If I was any judge, that girl enjoyed it.
It was a change for her. It gave her a different point of view. She laughed and
talked, and the kindler made a dim light compared to her eyes. I had a
pocketful of cigars, and as far as I was concerned there had never been any fall
of man. We were at the same old stand in the Garden of Eden. Out there
somewhere in the rain and the dark was the river of Zion, and the angel with
the flaming sword had not yet put up the keep-off-the-grass sign. I opened up
a gross or two of the Brazilians and made Mame put them on--rings, brooches,
necklaces, eardrops, bracelets, girdles, and lockets. She flashed and sparkled
like a million-dollar princess until she had pink spots in her cheeks and almost
cried for a looking-glass.
"When it got late I made a fine bunk on the floor for Mame with the hay and
my lap robes and blankets out of the wagon, and persuaded her to lie down. I
sat in the other room burning tobacco and listening to the pouring rain and
meditating on the many vicissitudes that came to a man during the seventy
years or so immediately preceding his funeral.
"I must have dozed a little while before morning, for my eyes were shut, and
when I opened them it was daylight, and there stood Mame with her hair all
done up neat and correct, and her eyes bright with admiration of existence.
"'Gee whiz, Jeff!' she exclaims, 'but I'm hungry. I could eat a--'
"I looked up and caught her eye. Her smile went back in and she gave me a
cold look of suspicion. Then I laughed, and laid down on the floor to laugh
easier. It seemed funny to me. By nature and geniality I am a hearty laugher,
and I went the limit. When I came to, Mame was sitting with her back to me,
all contaminated with dignity.
"'Don't be angry, Mame,' I says, 'for I couldn't help it. It's the funny way
you've done up your hair. If you could only see it!'
"'You needn't tell stories, sir,' said Mame, cool and advised. 'My hair is all
right. I know what you were laughing about. Why, Jeff, look outside,' she
winds up, peeping through a chink between the logs. I opened the little
wooden window and looked out. The entire river bottom was flooded, and the
knob of land on which the house stood was an island in the middle of a
rushing stream of yellow water a hundred yards wide. And it was still raining
hard. All we could do was to stay there till the doves brought in the olive
branch.
"I am bound to admit that conversations and amusements languished during

that day. I was aware that Mame was getting a too prolonged one-sided view
of things again, but I had no way to change it. Personally, I was wrapped up in
the desire to eat. I had hallucinations of hash and visions of ham, and I kept
saying to myself all the time, 'What'll you have to eat, Jeff?--what'll you order
now, old man, when the waiter comes?' I picks out to myself all sorts of
favourites from the bill of fare, and imagines them coming. I guess it's that
way with all hungry men. They can't get their cogitations trained on anything
but something to eat. It shows that the little table with the broken-legged caster
and the imitation Worcester sauce and the napkin covering up the coffee stains
is the paramount issue, after all, instead of the question of immortality or
peace between nations.
"I sat there, musing along, arguing with myself quite heated as to how I'd have
my steak--with mushrooms, or /a la creole/. Mame was on the other seat,
pensive, her head leaning on her hand. 'Let the potatoes come home-fried,' I
states in my mind, 'and brown the hash in the pan, with nine poached eggs on
the side.' I felt, careful, in my own pockets to see if I could find a peanut or a
grain or two of popcorn.
"Night came on again with the river still rising and the rain still falling. I
looked at Mame and I noticed that desperate look on her face that a girl always
wears when she passes an ice-cream lair. I knew that poor girl was hungry-maybe for the first time in her life. There was that anxious look in her eye that
a woman has only when she has missed a meal or feels her skirt coming
unfastened in the back.
"It was about eleven o'clock or so on the second night when we sat, gloomy, in
our shipwrecked cabin. I kept jerking my mind away from the subject of food,
but it kept flopping back again before I could fasten it. I thought of everything
good to eat I had ever heard of. I went away back to my kidhood and
remembered the hot biscuit sopped in sorghum and bacon gravy with partiality
and respect. Then I trailed along up the years, pausing at green apples and salt,
flapjacks and maple, lye hominy, fried chicken Old Virginia style, corn on the
cob, spareribs and sweet potato pie, and wound up with Georgia Brunswick
stew, which is the top notch of good things to eat, because it comprises 'em all.
"They say a drowning man sees a panorama of his whole life pass before him.
Well, when a man's starving he sees the ghost of every meal he ever ate set out
before him, and he invents new dishes that would make the fortune of a chef.
If somebody would collect the last words of men who starved to death, they'd
have to sift 'em mighty fine to discover the sentiment, but they'd compile into
a cook book that would sell into the millions.
"I guess I must have had my conscience pretty well inflicted with culinary
meditations, for, without intending to do so, I says, out loud, to the imaginary
waiter, 'Cut it thick and have it rare, with the French fried, and six, soft-

scrambled, on toast.'
"Mame turned her head quick as a wing. Her eyes were sparkling and she
smiled sudden.
"'Medium for me,' she rattles out, 'with the Juliennes, and three, straight up.
Draw one, and brown the wheats, double order to come. Oh, Jeff, wouldn't it
be glorious! And then I'd like to have a half fry, and a little chicken curried
with rice, and a cup custard with ice cream, and--'
"'Go easy,' I interrupts; 'where's the chicken liver pie, and the kidney /saute/ on
toast, and the roast lamb, and--'
"'Oh,' cuts in Mame, all excited, 'with mint sauce, and the turkey salad, and
stuffed olives, and raspberry tarts, and--'
"'Keep it going,' says I. 'Hurry up with the fried squash, and the hot corn pone
with sweet milk, and don't forget the apple dumpling with hard sauce, and the
cross-barred dew-berry pie--'
"Yes, for ten minutes we kept up that kind of restaurant repartee. We ranges up
and down and backward and forward over the main trunk lines and the
branches of the victual subject, and Mame leads the game, for she is apprised
in the ramifications of grub, and the dishes she nominates aggravates my
yearnings. It seems that there is a feeling that Mame will line up friendly again
with food. It seems that she looks upon the obnoxious science of eating with
less contempt than before.
"The next morning we find that the flood has subsided. I geared up the bays,
and we splashed out through the mud, some precarious, until we found the
road again. We were only a few miles wrong, and in two hours we were in
Oklahoma City. The first thing we saw was a big restaurant sign, and we piled
into there in a hurry. Here I finds myself sitting with Mame at table, with
knives and forks and plates between us, and she not scornful, but smiling with
starvation and sweetness.
"'Twas a new restaurant and well stocked. I designated a list of quotations
from the bill of fare that made the waiter look out toward the wagon to see
how many more might be coming.
"There we were, and there was the order being served. 'Twas a banquet for a
dozen, but we felt like a dozen. I looked across the table at Mame and smiled,
for I had recollections. Mame was looking at the table like a boy looks at his
first stem-winder. Then she looked at me, straight in the face, and two big
tears came in her eyes. The waiter was gone after more grub.
"'Jeff,' she says, soft like, 'I've been a foolish girl. I've looked at things from
the wrong side. I never felt this way before. Men get hungry every day like
this, don't they? They're big and strong, and they do the hard work of the

world, and they don't eat just to spite silly waiter girls in restaurants, do they,
Jeff? You said once--that is, you asked me--you wanted me to--well, Jeff, if
you still care--I'd be glad and willing to have you always sitting across the
table from me. Now give me something to eat, quick, please.'
"So, as I've said, a woman needs to change her point of view now and then.
They get tired of the same old sights--the same old dinner table, washtub, and
sewing machine. Give 'em a touch of the various--a little travel and a little rest,
a little tomfoolery along with the tragedies of keeping house, a little petting
after the blowing-up, a little upsetting and a little jostling around--and
everybody in the game will have chips added to their stack by the play."

XI
THE CABALLERO'S WAY
The Cisco Kid had killed six men in more or less fair scrimmages, had
murdered twice as many (mostly Mexicans), and had winged a larger number
whom he modestly forbore to count. Therefore a woman loved him.
The Kid was twenty-five, looked twenty; and a careful insurance company
would have estimated the probable time of his demise at, say, twenty-six. His
habitat was anywhere between the Frio and the Rio Grande. He killed for the
love of it--because he was quick-tempered-- to avoid arrest--for his own
amusement--any reason that came to his mind would suffice. He had escaped
capture because he could shoot five-sixths of a second sooner than any sheriff
or ranger in the service, and because he rode a speckled roan horse that knew
every cow-path in the mesquite and pear thickets from San Antonio to
Matamoras.
Tonia Perez, the girl who loved the Cisco Kid, was half Carmen, half
Madonna, and the rest--oh, yes, a woman who is half Carmen and half
Madonna can always be something more--the rest, let us say, was hummingbird. She lived in a grass-roofed /jacal/ near a little Mexican settlement at the
Lone Wolf Crossing of the Frio. With her lived a father or grandfather, a lineal
Aztec, somewhat less than a thousand years old, who herded a hundred goats
and lived in a continuous drunken dream from drinking /mescal/. Back of the
/jacal/ a tremendous forest of bristling pear, twenty feet high at its worst,
crowded almost to its door. It was along the bewildering maze of this spinous
thicket that the speckled roan would bring the Kid to see his girl. And once,
clinging like a lizard to the ridge-pole, high up under the peaked grass roof, he
had heard Tonia, with her Madonna face and Carmen beauty and hummingbird soul, parley with the sheriff's posse, denying knowledge of her man in her

soft /melange/ of Spanish and English.
One day the adjutant-general of the State, who is, /ex offico/, commander of
the ranger forces, wrote some sarcastic lines to Captain Duval of Company X,
stationed at Laredo, relative to the serene and undisturbed existence led by
murderers and desperadoes in the said captain's territory.
The captain turned the colour of brick dust under his tan, and forwarded the
letter, after adding a few comments, per ranger Private Bill Adamson, to
ranger Lieutenant Sandridge, camped at a water hole on the Nueces with a
squad of five men in preservation of law and order.
Lieutenant Sandridge turned a beautiful /couleur de rose/ through his ordinary
strawberry complexion, tucked the letter in his hip pocket, and chewed off the
ends of his gamboge moustache.
The next morning he saddled his horse and rode alone to the Mexican
settlement at the Lone Wolf Crossing of the Frio, twenty miles away.
Six feet two, blond as a Viking, quiet as a deacon, dangerous as a machine
gun, Sandridge moved among the /Jacales/, patiently seeking news of the
Cisco Kid.
Far more than the law, the Mexicans dreaded the cold and certain vengeance
of the lone rider that the ranger sought. It had been one of the Kid's pastimes
to shoot Mexicans "to see them kick": if he demanded from them moribund
Terpsichorean feats, simply that he might be entertained, what terrible and
extreme penalties would be certain to follow should they anger him! One and
all they lounged with upturned palms and shrugging shoulders, filling the air
with "/quien sabes/" and denials of the Kid's acquaintance.
But there was a man named Fink who kept a store at the Crossing--a man of
many nationalities, tongues, interests, and ways of thinking.
"No use to ask them Mexicans," he said to Sandridge. "They're afraid to tell.
This /hombre/ they call the Kid--Goodall is his name, ain't it?--he's been in my
store once or twice. I have an idea you might run across him at--but I guess I
don't keer to say, myself. I'm two seconds later in pulling a gun than I used to
be, and the difference is worth thinking about. But this Kid's got a halfMexican girl at the Crossing that he comes to see. She lives in that /jacal/ a
hundred yards down the arroyo at the edge of the pear. Maybe she--no, I don't
suppose she would, but that /jacal/ would be a good place to watch, anyway."
Sandridge rode down to the /jacal/ of Perez. The sun was low, and the broad
shade of the great pear thicket already covered the grass- thatched hut. The
goats were enclosed for the night in a brush corral near by. A few kids walked
the top of it, nibbling the chaparral leaves. The old Mexican lay upon a blanket
on the grass, already in a stupor from his mescal, and dreaming, perhaps, of

the nights when he and Pizarro touched glasses to their New World fortunes-so old his wrinkled face seemed to proclaim him to be. And in the door of the
/jacal/ stood Tonia. And Lieutenant Sandridge sat in his saddle staring at her
like a gannet agape at a sailorman.
The Cisco Kid was a vain person, as all eminent and successful assassins are,
and his bosom would have been ruffled had he known that at a simple
exchange of glances two persons, in whose minds he had been looming large,
suddenly abandoned (at least for the time) all thought of him.
Never before had Tonia seen such a man as this. He seemed to be made of
sunshine and blood-red tissue and clear weather. He seemed to illuminate the
shadow of the pear when he smiled, as though the sun were rising again. The
men she had known had been small and dark. Even the Kid, in spite of his
achievements, was a stripling no larger than herself, with black, straight hair
and a cold, marble face that chilled the noonday.
As for Tonia, though she sends description to the poorhouse, let her make a
millionaire of your fancy. Her blue-black hair, smoothly divided in the middle
and bound close to her head, and her large eyes full of the Latin melancholy,
gave her the Madonna touch. Her motions and air spoke of the concealed fire
and the desire to charm that she had inherited from the /gitanas/ of the Basque
province. As for the humming-bird part of her, that dwelt in her heart; you
could not perceive it unless her bright red skirt and dark blue blouse gave you
a symbolic hint of the vagarious bird.
The newly lighted sun-god asked for a drink of water. Tonia brought it from
the red jar hanging under the brush shelter. Sandridge considered it necessary
to dismount so as to lessen the trouble of her ministrations.
I play no spy; nor do I assume to master the thoughts of any human heart; but I
assert, by the chronicler's right, that before a quarter of an hour had sped,
Sandridge was teaching her how to plaint a six-strand rawhide stake-rope, and
Tonia had explained to him that were it not for her little English book that the
peripatetic /padre/ had given her and the little crippled /chivo/, that she fed
from a bottle, she would be very, very lonely indeed.
Which leads to a suspicion that the Kid's fences needed repairing, and that the
adjutant-general's sarcasm had fallen upon unproductive soil.
In his camp by the water hole Lieutenant Sandridge announced and reiterated
his intention of either causing the Cisco Kid to nibble the black loam of the
Frio country prairies or of haling him before a judge and jury. That sounded
business-like. Twice a week he rode over to the Lone Wolf Crossing of the
Frio, and directed Tonia's slim, slightly lemon-tinted fingers among the
intricacies of the slowly growing lariata. A six-strand plait is hard to learn and
easy to teach.

The ranger knew that he might find the Kid there at any visit. He kept his
armament ready, and had a frequent eye for the pear thicket at the rear of the
/jacal/. Thus he might bring down the kite and the humming-bird with one
stone.
While the sunny-haired ornithologist was pursuing his studies the Cisco Kid
was also attending to his professional duties. He moodily shot up a saloon in a
small cow village on Quintana Creek, killed the town marshal (plugging him
neatly in the centre of his tin badge), and then rode away, morose and
unsatisfied. No true artist is uplifted by shooting an aged man carrying an oldstyle .38 bulldog.
On his way the Kid suddenly experienced the yearning that all men feel when
wrong-doing loses its keen edge of delight. He yearned for the woman he
loved to reassure him that she was his in spite of it. He wanted her to call his
bloodthirstiness bravery and his cruelty devotion. He wanted Tonia to bring
him water from the red jar under the brush shelter, and tell him how the
/chivo/ was thriving on the bottle.
The Kid turned the speckled roan's head up the ten-mile pear flat that stretches
along the Arroyo Hondo until it ends at the Lone Wolf Crossing of the Frio.
The roan whickered; for he had a sense of locality and direction equal to that
of a belt-line street-car horse; and he knew he would soon be nibbling the rich
mesquite grass at the end of a forty-foot stake-rope while Ulysses rested his
head in Circe's straw-roofed hut.
More weird and lonesome than the journey of an Amazonian explorer is the
ride of one through a Texas pear flat. With dismal monotony and startling
variety the uncanny and multiform shapes of the cacti lift their twisted trunks,
and fat, bristly hands to encumber the way. The demon plant, appearing to live
without soil or rain, seems to taunt the parched traveller with its lush grey
greenness. It warps itself a thousand times about what look to be open and
inviting paths, only to lure the rider into blind and impassable spine-defended
"bottoms of the bag," leaving him to retreat, if he can, with the points of the
compass whirling in his head.
To be lost in the pear is to die almost the death of the thief on the cross,
pierced by nails and with grotesque shapes of all the fiends hovering about.
But it was not so with the Kid and his mount. Winding, twisting, circling,
tracing the most fantastic and bewildering trail ever picked out, the good roan
lessened the distance to the Lone Wolf Crossing with every coil and turn that
he made.
While they fared the Kid sang. He knew but one tune and sang it, as he knew
but one code and lived it, and but one girl and loved her. He was a singleminded man of conventional ideas. He had a voice like a coyote with

bronchitis, but whenever he chose to sing his song he sang it. It was a
conventional song of the camps and trail, running at its beginning as near as
may be to these words:
Don't you monkey with my Lulu girl
Or I'll tell you what I'll do-and so on. The roan was inured to it, and did not mind.
But even the poorest singer will, after a certain time, gain his own consent to
refrain from contributing to the world's noises. So the Kid, by the time he was
within a mile or two of Tonia's /jacal/, had reluctantly allowed his song to die
away--not because his vocal performance had become less charming to his
own ears, but because his laryngeal muscles were aweary.
As though he were in a circus ring the speckled roan wheeled and danced
through the labyrinth of pear until at length his rider knew by certain
landmarks that the Lone Wolf Crossing was close at hand. Then, where the
pear was thinner, he caught sight of the grass roof of the /jacal/ and the
hackberry tree on the edge of the arroyo. A few yards farther the Kid stopped
the roan and gazed intently through the prickly openings. Then he dismounted,
dropped the roan's reins, and proceeded on foot, stooping and silent, like an
Indian. The roan, knowing his part, stood still, making no sound.
The Kid crept noiselessly to the very edge of the pear thicket and reconnoitred
between the leaves of a clump of cactus.
Ten yards from his hiding-place, in the shade of the /jacal/, sat his Tonia
calmly plaiting a rawhide lariat. So far she might surely escape condemnation;
women have been known, from time to time, to engage in more mischievous
occupations. But if all must be told, there is to be added that her head reposed
against the broad and comfortable chest of a tall red-and-yellow man, and that
his arm was about her, guiding her nimble fingers that required so many
lessons at the intricate six- strand plait.
Sandridge glanced quickly at the dark mass of pear when he heard a slight
squeaking sound that was not altogether unfamiliar. A gun- scabbard will
make that sound when one grasps the handle of a six- shooter suddenly. But
the sound was not repeated; and Tonia's fingers needed close attention.
And then, in the shadow of death, they began to talk of their love; and in the
still July afternoon every word they uttered reached the ears of the Kid.
"Remember, then," said Tonia, "you must not come again until I send for you.
Soon he will be here. A /vaquero/ at the /tienda/ said to-day he saw him on the
Guadalupe three days ago. When he is that near he always comes. If he comes
and finds you here he will kill you. So, for my sake, you must come no more
until I send you the word."

"All right," said the stranger. "And then what?"
"And then," said the girl, "you must bring your men here and kill him. If not,
he will kill you."
"He ain't a man to surrender, that's sure," said Sandridge. "It's kill or be killed
for the officer that goes up against Mr. Cisco Kid."
"He must die," said the girl. "Otherwise there will not be any peace in the
world for thee and me. He has killed many. Let him so die. Bring your men,
and give him no chance to escape."
"You used to think right much of him," said Sandridge.
Tonia dropped the lariat, twisted herself around, and curved a lemon- tinted
arm over the ranger's shoulder.
"But then," she murmured in liquid Spanish, "I had not beheld thee, thou great,
red mountain of a man! And thou art kind and good, as well as strong. Could
one choose him, knowing thee? Let him die; for then I will not be filled with
fear by day and night lest he hurt thee or me."
"How can I know when he comes?" asked Sandridge.
"When he comes," said Tonia, "he remains two days, sometimes three.
Gregorio, the small son of old Luisa, the /lavendera/, has a swift pony. I will
write a letter to thee and send it by him, saying how it will be best to come
upon him. By Gregorio will the letter come. And bring many men with thee,
and have much care, oh, dear red one, for the rattlesnake is not quicker to
strike than is '/El Chivato/,' as they call him, to send a ball from his /pistola/."
"The Kid's handy with his gun, sure enough," admitted Sandridge, "but when I
come for him I shall come alone. I'll get him by myself or not at all. The Cap
wrote one or two things to me that make me want to do the trick without any
help. You let me know when Mr. Kid arrives, and I'll do the rest."
"I will send you the message by the boy Gregorio," said the girl. "I knew you
were braver than that small slayer of men who never smiles. How could I ever
have thought I cared for him?"
It was time for the ranger to ride back to his camp on the water hole. Before he
mounted his horse he raised the slight form of Tonia with one arm high from
the earth for a parting salute. The drowsy stillness of the torpid summer air
still lay thick upon the dreaming afternoon. The smoke from the fire in the
/jacal/, where the /frijoles/ blubbered in the iron pot, rose straight as a plumbline above the clay-daubed chimney. No sound or movement disturbed the
serenity of the dense pear thicket ten yards away.
When the form of Sandridge had disappeared, loping his big dun down the
steep banks of the Frio crossing, the Kid crept back to his own horse, mounted

him, and rode back along the tortuous trail he had come.
But not far. He stopped and waited in the silent depths of the pear until half an
hour had passed. And then Tonia heard the high, untrue notes of his unmusical
singing coming nearer and nearer; and she ran to the edge of the pear to meet
him.
The Kid seldom smiled; but he smiled and waved his hat when he saw her. He
dismounted, and his girl sprang into his arms. The Kid looked at her fondly.
His thick, black hair clung to his head like a wrinkled mat. The meeting
brought a slight ripple of some undercurrent of feeling to his smooth, dark face
that was usually as motionless as a clay mask.
"How's my girl?" he asked, holding her close.
"Sick of waiting so long for you, dear one," she answered. "My eyes are dim
with always gazing into that devil's pincushion through which you come. And
I can see into it such a little way, too. But you are here, beloved one, and I will
not scold. /Que mal muchacho/! not to come to see your /alma/ more often. Go
in and rest, and let me water your horse and stake him with the long rope.
There is cool water in the jar for you."
The Kid kissed her affectionately.
"Not if the court knows itself do I let a lady stake my horse for me," said he.
"But if you'll run in, /chica/, and throw a pot of coffee together while I attend
to the /caballo/, I'll be a good deal obliged."
Besides his marksmanship the Kid had another attribute for which he admired
himself greatly. He was /muy caballero/, as the Mexicans express it, where the
ladies were concerned. For them he had always gentle words and
consideration. He could not have spoken a harsh word to a woman. He might
ruthlessly slay their husbands and brothers, but he could not have laid the
weight of a finger in anger upon a woman. Wherefore many of that interesting
division of humanity who had come under the spell of his politeness declared
their disbelief in the stories circulated about Mr. Kid. One shouldn't believe
everything one heard, they said. When confronted by their indignant men folk
with proof of the /caballero's/ deeds of infamy, they said maybe he had been
driven to it, and that he knew how to treat a lady, anyhow.
Considering this extremely courteous idiosyncrasy of the Kid and the pride he
took in it, one can perceive that the solution of the problem that was presented
to him by what he saw and heard from his hiding- place in the pear that
afternoon (at least as to one of the actors) must have been obscured by
difficulties. And yet one could not think of the Kid overlooking little matters
of that kind.
At the end of the short twilight they gathered around a supper of /frijoles/, goat

steaks, canned peaches, and coffee, by the light of a lantern in the /jacal/.
Afterward, the ancestor, his flock corralled, smoked a cigarette and became a
mummy in a grey blanket. Tonia washed the few dishes while the Kid dried
them with the flour-sacking towel. Her eyes shone; she chatted volubly of the
inconsequent happenings of her small world since the Kid's last visit; it was as
all his other home-comings had been.
Then outside Tonia swung in a grass hammock with her guitar and sang sad
/canciones de amor/.
"Do you love me just the same, old girl?" asked the Kid, hunting for his
cigarette papers.
"Always the same, little one," said Tonia, her dark eyes lingering upon him.
"I must go over to Fink's," said the Kid, rising, "for some tobacco. I thought I
had another sack in my coat. I'll be back in a quarter of an hour."
"Hasten," said Tonia, "and tell me--how long shall I call you my own this
time? Will you be gone again to-morrow, leaving me to grieve, or will you be
longer with your Tonia?"
"Oh, I might stay two or three days this trip," said the Kid, yawning. "I've been
on the dodge for a month, and I'd like to rest up."
He was gone half an hour for his tobacco. When he returned Tonia was still
lying in the hammock.
"It's funny," said the Kid, "how I feel. I feel like there was somebody lying
behind every bush and tree waiting to shoot me. I never had mullygrubs like
them before. Maybe it's one of them presumptions. I've got half a notion to
light out in the morning before day. The Guadalupe country is burning up
about that old Dutchman I plugged down there."
"You are not afraid--no one could make my brave little one fear."
"Well, I haven't been usually regarded as a jack-rabbit when it comes to
scrapping; but I don't want a posse smoking me out when I'm in your /jacal/.
Somebody might get hurt that oughtn't to."
"Remain with your Tonia; no one will find you here."
The Kid looked keenly into the shadows up and down the arroyo and toward
the dim lights of the Mexican village.
"I'll see how it looks later on," was his decision.
At midnight a horseman rode into the rangers' camp, blazing his way by noisy
"halloes" to indicate a pacific mission. Sandridge and one or two others turned
out to investigate the row. The rider announced himself to be Domingo Sales,
from the Lone Wolf Crossing. he bore a letter for Senor Sandridge. Old Luisa,

the /lavendera/, had persuaded him to bring it, he said, her son Gregorio being
too ill of a fever to ride.
Sandridge lighted the camp lantern and read the letter. These were its words:
/Dear One/: He has come. Hardly had you ridden away when he came
out of the pear. When he first talked he said he would stay three
days or more. Then as it grew later he was like a wolf or a fox,
and walked about without rest, looking and listening. Soon he said
he must leave before daylight when it is dark and stillest. And
then he seemed to suspect that I be not true to him. He looked at
me so strange that I am frightened. I swear to him that I love
him, his own Tonia. Last of all he said I must prove to him I am
true. He thinks that even now men are waiting to kill him as he
rides from my house. To escape he says he will dress in my
clothes, my red skirt and the blue waist I wear and the brown
mantilla over the head, and thus ride away. But before that he
says that I must put on his clothes, his /pantalones/ and /camisa/
and hat, and ride away on his horse from the /jacal/ as far as the
big road beyond the crossing and back again. This before he goes,
so he can tell if I am true and if men are hidden to shoot him. It
is a terrible thing. An hour before daybreak this is to be. Come,
my dear one, and kill this man and take me for your Tonia. Do not
try to take hold of him alive, but kill him quickly. Knowing all,
you should do that. You must come long before the time and hide
yourself in the little shed near the /jacal/ where the wagon and
saddles are kept. It is dark in there. He will wear my red skirt
and blue waist and brown mantilla. I send you a hundred kisses.
Come surely and shoot quickly and straight.
Thine Own Tonia.
Sandridge quickly explained to his men the official part of the missive. The
rangers protested against his going alone.
"I'll get him easy enough," said the lieutenant. "The girl's got him trapped.
And don't even think he'll get the drop on me."

Sandridge saddled his horse and rode to the Lone Wolf Crossing. He tied his
big dun in a clump of brush on the arroyo, took his Winchester from its
scabbard, and carefully approached the Perez /jacal/. There was only the half
of a high moon drifted over by ragged, milk-white gulf clouds.
The wagon-shed was an excellent place for ambush; and the ranger got inside
it safely. In the black shadow of the brush shelter in front of the /jacal/ he
could see a horse tied and hear him impatiently pawing the hard-trodden earth.
He waited almost an hour before two figures came out of the /jacal/. One, in
man's clothes, quickly mounted the horse and galloped past the wagon-shed
toward the crossing and village. And then the other figure, in skirt, waist, and
mantilla over its head, stepped out into the faint moonlight, gazing after the
rider. Sandridge thought he would take his chance then before Tonia rode
back. He fancied she might not care to see it.
"Throw up your hands," he ordered loudly, stepping out of the wagon- shed
with his Winchester at his shoulder.
There was a quick turn of the figure, but no movement to obey, so the ranger
pumped in the bullets--one--two--three--and then twice more; for you never
could be too sure of bringing down the Cisco Kid. There was no danger of
missing at ten paces, even in that half moonlight.
The old ancestor, asleep on his blanket, was awakened by the shots. Listening
further, he heard a great cry from some man in mortal distress or anguish, and
rose up grumbling at the disturbing ways of moderns.
The tall, red ghost of a man burst into the /jacal/, reaching one hand, shaking
like a /tule/ reed, for the lantern hanging on its nail. The other spread a letter
on the table.
"Look at this letter, Perez," cried the man. "Who wrote it?"
"/Ah, Dios/! it is Senor Sandridge," mumbled the old man, approaching.
"/Pues, senor/, that letter was written by '/El Chivato/,' as he is called--by the
man of Tonia. They say he is a bad man; I do not know. While Tonia slept he
wrote the letter and sent it by this old hand of mine to Domingo Sales to be
brought to you. Is there anything wrong in the letter? I am very old; and I did
not know. /Valgame Dios/! it is a very foolish world; and there is nothing in
the house to drink-- nothing to drink."
Just then all that Sandridge could think of to do was to go outside and throw
himself face downward in the dust by the side of his humming-bird, of whom
not a feather fluttered. He was not a /caballero/ by instinct, and he could not
understand the niceties of revenge.
A mile away the rider who had ridden past the wagon-shed struck up a harsh,
untuneful song, the words of which began:

Don't you monkey with my Lulu girl
Or I'll tell you what I'll do—

XII
THE SPHINX APPLE
Twenty miles out from Paradise, and fifteen miles short of Sunrise City,
Bildad Rose, the stage-driver, stopped his team. A furious snow had been
falling all day. Eight inches it measured now, on a level. The remainder of the
road was not without peril in daylight, creeping along the ribs of a bijou range
of ragged mountains. Now, when both snow and night masked its dangers,
further travel was not to be thought of, said Bildad Rose. So he pulled up his
four stout horses, and delivered to his five passengers oral deductions of his
wisdom.
Judge Menefee, to whom men granted leadership and the initiatory as upon a
silver salver, sprang from the coach at once. Four of his fellow-passengers
followed, inspired by his example, ready to explore, to objurgate, to resist, to
submit, to proceed, according as their prime factor might be inclined to sway
them. The fifth passenger, a young woman, remained in the coach.
Bildad had halted upon the shoulder of the first mountain spur. Two railfences, ragged-black, hemmed the road. Fifty yards above the upper fence,
showing a dark blot in the white drifts, stood a small house. Upon this house
descended--or rather ascended--Judge Menefee and his cohorts with boyish
whoops born of the snow and stress. They called; they pounded at window and
door. At the inhospitable silence they waxed restive; they assaulted and forced
the pregnable barriers, and invaded the premises.
The watchers from the coach heard stumblings and shoutings from the interior
of the ravaged house. Before long a light within flickered, glowed, flamed
high and bright and cheerful. Then came running back through the driving
flakes the exuberant explorers. More deeply pitched than the clarion--even
orchestral in volume--the voice of Judge Menefee proclaimed the succour that
lay in apposition with their state of travail. The one room of the house was
uninhabited, he said, and bare of furniture; but it contained a great fireplace,
and they had discovered an ample store of chopped wood in a lean-to at the
rear. Housing and warmth against the shivering night were thus assured. For
the placation of Bildad Rose there was news of a stable, not ruined beyond
service, with hay in a loft, near the house.
"Gentlemen," cried Bildad Rose from his seat, swathed in coats and robes,
"tear me down two panels of that fence, so I can drive in. That is old man

Redruth's shanty. I thought we must be nigh it. They took him to the foolish
house in August."
Cheerfully the four passengers sprang at the snow-capped rails. The exhorted
team tugged the coach up the slant to the door of the edifice from which a
mid-summer madness had ravished its proprietor. The driver and two of the
passengers began to unhitch. Judge Menefee opened the door of the coach, and
removed his hat.
"I have to announce, Miss Garland," said he, "the enforced suspension of our
journey. The driver asserts that the risk in travelling the mountain road by
night is too great even to consider. It will be necessary to remain in the shelter
of this house until morning. I beg that you will feel that there is nothing to fear
beyond a temporary inconvenience. I have personally inspected the house, and
find that there are means to provide against the rigour of the weather, at least.
You shall be made as comfortable as possible. Permit me to assist you to
alight."
To the Judge's side came the passenger whose pursuit in life was the placing of
the Little Goliath windmill. His name was Dunwoody; but that matters not
much. In travelling merely from Paradise to Sunrise City one needs little or no
name. Still, one who would seek to divide honours with Judge Madison L.
Menefee deserves a cognomenal peg upon which Fame may hang a wreath.
Thus spake, loudly and buoyantly, the aerial miller:
"Guess you'll have to climb out of the ark, Mrs. McFarland. This wigwam isn't
exactly the Palmer House, but it turns snow, and they won't search your grip
for souvenir spoons when you leave. /We've/ got a fire going; and /we'll/ fix
you up with dry Tilbys and keep the mice away, anyhow, all right, all right."
One of the two passengers who were struggling in a melee of horses, harness,
snow, and the sarcastic injunctions of Bildad Rose, called loudly from the
whirl of his volunteer duties: "Say! some of you fellows get Miss Solomon
into the house, will you? Whoa, there! you confounded brute!"
Again must it be gently urged that in travelling from Paradise to Sunrise City
an accurate name is prodigality. When Judge Menefee-- sanctioned to the act
by his grey hair and widespread repute--had introduced himself to the lady
passenger, she had, herself, sweetly breathed a name, in response, that the
hearing of the male passengers had variously interpreted. In the not unjealous
spirit of rivalry that eventuated, each clung stubbornly to his own theory. For
the lady passenger to have reasseverated or corrected would have seemed
didactic if not unduly solicitous of a specific acquaintance. Therefore the lady
passenger permitted herself to be Garlanded and McFarlanded and Solomoned
with equal and discreet complacency. It is thirty-five miles from Paradise to
Sunrise City. /Compagnon de voyage/ is name enough, by the gripsack of the

Wandering Jew! for so brief a journey.
Soon the little party of wayfarers were happily seated in a cheerful arc before
the roaring fire. The robes, cushions, and removable portions of the coach had
been brought in and put to service. The lady passenger chose a place near the
hearth at one end of the arc. There she graced almost a throne that her subjects
had prepared. She sat upon cushions and leaned against an empty box and
barrel, robe bespread, which formed a defence from the invading draughts.
She extended her feet, delectably shod, to the cordial heat. She ungloved her
hands, but retained about her neck her long fur boa. The unstable flames half
revealed, while the warding boa half submerged, her face-- a youthful face,
altogether feminine, clearly moulded and calm with beauty's unchallenged
confidence. Chivalry and manhood were here vying to please and comfort her.
She seemed to accept their devoirs--not piquantly, as one courted and
attended; nor preeningly, as many of her sex unworthily reap their honours;
not yet stolidly, as the ox receives his hay; but concordantly with nature's own
plan--as the lily ingests the drop of dew foreordained to its refreshment.
Outside the wind roared mightily, the fine snow whizzed through the cracks,
the cold besieged the backs of the immolated six; but the elements did not lack
a champion that night. Judge Menefee was attorney for the storm. The weather
was his client, and he strove by special pleading to convince his companions
in that frigid jury-box that they sojourned in a bower of roses, beset only by
benignant zephyrs. He drew upon a fund of gaiety, wit, and anecdote,
sophistical, but crowned with success. His cheerfulness communicated itself
irresistibly. Each one hastened to contribute his own quota toward the general
optimism. Even the lady passenger was moved to expression.
"I think it is quite charming," she said, in her slow, crystal tones.
At intervals some one of the passengers would rise and humorously explore
the room. There was little evidence to be collected of its habitation by old man
Redruth.
Bildad Rose was called upon vivaciously for the ex-hermit's history. Now,
since the stage-driver's horses were fairly comfortable and his passengers
appeared to be so, peace and comity returned to him.
"The old didapper," began Bildad, somewhat irreverently, "infested this here
house about twenty year. He never allowed nobody to come nigh him. He'd
duck his head inside and slam the door whenever a team drove along. There
was spinning-wheels up in his loft, all right. He used to buy his groceries and
tobacco at Sam Tilly's store, on the Little Muddy. Last August he went up
there dressed in a red bedquilt, and told Sam he was King Solomon, and that
the Queen of Sheba was coming to visit him. He fetched along all the money
he had--a little bag full of silver--and dropped it in Sam's well. 'She won't

come,' says old man Redruth to Sam, 'if she knows I've got any money.'
"As soon as folks heard he had that sort of a theory about women and money
they knowed he was crazy; so they sent down and packed him to the foolish
asylum."
"Was there a romance in his life that drove him to a solitary existence?" asked
one of the passengers, a young man who had an Agency.
"No," said Bildad, "not that I ever heard spoke of. Just ordinary trouble. They
say he had had unfortunateness in the way of love derangements with a young
lady when he was young; before he contracted red bed-quilts and had his
financial conclusions disqualified. I never heard of no romance."
"Ah!" exclaimed Judge Menefee, impressively; "a case of unrequited
affection, no doubt."
"No, sir," returned Bildad, "not at all. She never married him. Marmaduke
Mulligan, down at Paradise, seen a man once that come from old Redruth's
town. He said Redruth was a fine young man, but when you kicked him on the
pocket all you could hear jingle was a cuff-fastener and a bunch of keys. He
was engaged to this young lady--Miss Alice-- something was her name; I've
forgot. This man said she was the kind of girl you like to have reach across
you in a car to pay the fare. Well, there come to the town a young chap all
affluent and easy, and fixed up with buggies and mining stock and leisure
time. Although she was a staked claim, Miss Alice and the new entry seemed
to strike a mutual kind of a clip. They had calls and coincidences of going to
the post office and such things as sometimes make a girl send back the
engagement ring and other presents--'a rift within the loot,' the poetry man
calls it.
"One day folks seen Redruth and Miss Alice standing talking at the gate. Then
he lifts his hat and walks away, and that was the last anybody in that town seen
of him, as far as this man knew."
"What about the young lady?" asked the young man who had an Agency.
"Never heard," answered Bildad. "Right there is where my lode of information
turns to an old spavined crowbait, and folds its wings, for I've pumped it dry."
"A very sad--" began Judge Menefee, but his remark was curtailed by a higher
authority.
"What a charming story!" said the lady passenger, in flute-like tones.
A little silence followed, except for the wind and the crackling of the fire.
The men were seated upon the floor, having slightly mitigated its inhospitable
surface with wraps and stray pieces of boards. The man who was placing Little
Goliath windmills arose and walked about to ease his cramped muscles.

Suddenly a triumphant shout came from him. He hurried back from a dusky
corner of the room, bearing aloft something in his hand. It was an apple--a
large, red-mottled, firm pippin, pleasing to behold. In a paper bag on a high
shelf in that corner he had found it. It could have been no relic of the
lovewrecked Redruth, for its glorious soundness repudiated the theory that it
had lain on that musty shelf since August. No doubt some recent bivouackers,
lunching in the deserted house, had left it there.
Dunwoody--again his exploits demand for him the honours of nomenclature-flaunted his apple in the faces of his fellow-marooners. "See what I found,
Mrs. McFarland!" he cried, vaingloriously. He held the apple high up in the
light of the fire, where it glowed a still richer red. The lady passenger smiled
calmly--always calmly.
"What a charming apple!" she murmured, clearly.
For a brief space Judge Menefee felt crushed, humiliated, relegated. Second
place galled him. Why had this blatant, obtrusive, unpolished man of
windmills been selected by Fate instead of himself to discover the sensational
apple? He could have made of the act a scene, a function, a setting for some
impromptu, fanciful discourse or piece of comedy--and have retained the role
of cynosure. Actually, the lady passenger was regarding this ridiculous
Dunboddy or Woodbundy with an admiring smile, as if the fellow had
performed a feat! And the windmill man swelled and gyrated like a sample of
his own goods, puffed up with the wind that ever blows from the chorus land
toward the domain of the star.
While the transported Dunwoody, with his Aladdin's apple, was receiving the
fickle attentions of all, the resourceful jurist formed a plan to recover his own
laurels.
With his courtliest smile upon his heavy but classic features, Judge Menefee
advanced, and took the apple, as if to examine it, from the hand of Dunwoody.
In his hand it became Exhibit A.
"A fine apple," he said, approvingly. "Really, my dear Mr. Dudwindy, you
have eclipsed all of us as a forager. But I have an idea. This apple shall
become an emblem, a token, a symbol, a prize bestowed by the mind and heart
of beauty upon the most deserving."
The audience, except one, applauded. "Good on the stump, ain't he?"
commented the passenger who was nobody in particular to the young man
who had an Agency.
The unresponsive one was the windmill man. He saw himself reduced to the
ranks. Never would the thought have occurred to him to declare his apple an
emblem. He had intended, after it had been divided and eaten, to create
diversion by sticking the seeds against his forehead and naming them for

young ladies of his acquaintance. One he was going to name Mrs. McFarland.
The seed that fell off first would be--but 'twas too late now.
"The apple," continued Judge Menefee, charging his jury, "in modern days
occupies, though undeservedly, a lowly place in our esteem. Indeed, it is so
constantly associated with the culinary and the commercial that it is hardly to
be classed among the polite fruits. But in ancient times this was not so.
Biblical, historical, and mythological lore abounds with evidences that the
apple was the aristocrat of fruits. We still say 'the apple of the eye' when we
wish to describe something superlatively precious. We find in Proverbs the
comparison to 'apples of silver.' No other product of tree or vine has been so
utilised in figurative speech. Who has not heard of and longed for the 'apples
of the Hesperides'? I need not call your attention to the most tremendous and
significant instance of the apple's ancient prestige when its consumption by
our first parents occasioned the fall of man from his state of goodness and
perfection."
"Apples like them," said the windmill man, lingering with the objective article,
"are worth $3.50 a barrel in the Chicago market."
"Now, what I have to propose," said Judge Menefee, conceding an indulgent
smile to his interrupter, "is this: We must remain here, perforce, until morning.
We have wood in plenty to keep us warm. Our next need is to entertain
ourselves as best we can, in order that the time shall not pass too slowly. I
propose that we place this apple in the hands of Miss Garland. It is no longer a
fruit, but, as I said, a prize, in award, representing a great human idea. Miss
Garland, herself, shall cease to be an individual--but only temporarily, I am
happy to add"--(a low bow, full of the old-time grace). "She shall represent her
sex; she shall be the embodiment, the epitome of womankind--the heart and
brain, I may say, of God's masterpiece of creation. In this guise she shall judge
and decide the question which follows:
"But a few minutes ago our friend, Mr. Rose, favoured us with an entertaining
but fragmentary sketch of the romance in the life of the former professor of
this habitation. The few facts that we have learned seem to me to open up a
fascinating field for conjecture, for the study of human hearts, for the exercise
of the imagination--in short, for story-telling. Let us make use of the
opportunity. Let each one of us relate his own version of the story of Redruth,
the hermit, and his lady-love, beginning where Mr. Rose's narrative ends--at
the parting of the lovers at the gate. This much should be assumed and
conceded--that the young lady was not necessarily to blame for Redruth's
becoming a crazed and world-hating hermit. When we have done, Miss
Garland shall render the JUDGEMENT OF WOMAN. As the Spirit of her Sex
she shall decide which version of the story best and most truly depicts human
and love interest, and most faithfully estimates the character and acts of

Redruth's betrothed according to the feminine view. The apple shall be
bestowed upon him who is awarded the decision. If you are all agreed, we
shall be pleased to hear the first story from Mr. Dinwiddie."
The last sentence captured the windmill man. He was not one to linger in the
dumps.
"That's a first-rate scheme, Judge," he said, heartily. "Be a regular short-story
vaudeville, won't it? I used to be correspondent for a paper in Springfield, and
when there wasn't any news I faked it. Guess I can do my turn all right."
"I think the idea is charming," said the lady passenger, brightly. "It will be
almost like a game."
Judge Menefee stepped forward and placed the apple in her hand impressively.
"In olden days," he said, orotundly, "Paris awarded the golden apple to the
most beautiful."
"I was at the Exposition," remarked the windmill man, now cheerful again,
"but I never heard of it. And I was on the Midway, too, all the time I wasn't at
the machinery exhibit."
"But now," continued the Judge, "the fruit shall translate to us the mystery and
wisdom of the feminine heart. Take the apple, Miss Garland. Hear our modest
tales of romance, and then award the prize as you may deem it just."
The lady passenger smiled sweetly. The apple lay in her lap beneath her robes
and wraps. She reclined against her protecting bulwark, brightly and cosily at
ease. But for the voices and the wind one might have listened hopefully to
hear her purr. Someone cast fresh logs upon the fire. Judge Menefee nodded
suavely. "Will you oblige us with the initial story?" he asked.
The windmill man sat as sits a Turk, with his hat well back on his head on
account of the draughts.
"Well," he began, without any embarrassment, "this is about the way I size up
the difficulty: Of course Redruth was jostled a good deal by this duck who had
money to play ball with who tried to cut him out of his girl. So he goes
around, naturally, and asks her if the game is still square. Well, nobody wants
a guy cutting in with buggies and gold bonds when he's got an option on a girl.
Well, he goes around to see her. Well, maybe he's hot, and talks like the
proprietor, and forgets that an engagement ain't always a lead-pipe cinch. Well,
I guess that makes Alice warm under the lacy yoke. Well, she answers back
sharp. Well, he--"
"Say!" interrupted the passenger who was nobody in particular, "if you could
put up a windmill on every one of them 'wells' you're using, you'd be able to
retire from business, wouldn't you?"

The windmill man grinned good-naturedly.
"Oh, I ain't no /Guy de Mopassong/," he said, cheerfully. "I'm giving it to you
in straight American. Well, she says something like this: 'Mr. Gold Bonds is
only a friend,' says she; 'but he takes me riding and buys me theatre tickets,
and that's what you never do. Ain't I to never have any pleasure in life while I
can?' 'Pass this chatfield- chatfield thing along,' says Redruth;--'hand out the
mitt to the Willie with creases in it or you don't put your slippers under my
wardrobe.'
"Now that kind of train orders don't go with a girl that's got any spirit. I bet
that girl loved her honey all the time. Maybe she only wanted, as girls do, to
work the good thing for a little fun and caramels before she settled down to
patch George's other pair, and be a good wife. But he is glued to the high
horse, and won't come down. Well, she hands him back the ring, proper
enough; and George goes away and hits the booze. Yep. That's what done it. I
bet that girl fired the cornucopia with the fancy vest two days after her steady
left. George boards a freight and checks his bag of crackers for parts unknown.
He sticks to Old Booze for a number of years; and then the aniline and
aquafortis gets the decision. 'Me for the hermit's hut,' says George, 'and the
long whiskers, and the buried can of money that isn't there.'
"But that Alice, in my mind, was on the level. She never married, but took up
typewriting as soon as the wrinkles began to show, and kept a cat that came
when you said 'weeny--weeny--weeny!' I got too much faith in good women to
believe they throw down the fellow they're stuck on every time for the dough."
The windmill man ceased.
"I think," said the lady passenger, slightly moving upon her lowly throne, "that
that is a char--"
"Oh, Miss Garland!" interposed Judge Menefee, with uplifted hand, "I beg of
you, no comments! It would not be fair to the other contestants. Mr.--er--will
you take the next turn?" The Judge addressed the young man who had the
Agency.
"My version of the romance," began the young man, diffidently clasping his
hands, "would be this: They did not quarrel when they parted. Mr. Redruth
bade her good-by and went out into the world to seek his fortune. He knew his
love would remain true to him. He scorned the thought that his rival could
make an impression upon a heart so fond and faithful. I would say that Mr.
Redruth went out to the Rocky Mountains in Wyoming to seek for gold. One
day a crew of pirates landed and captured him while at work, and--"
"Hey! what's that?" sharply called the passenger who was nobody in
particular--"a crew of pirates landed in the Rocky Mountains! Will you tell us
how they sailed--"

"Landed from a train," said the narrator, quietly and not without some
readiness. "They kept him prisoner in a cave for months, and then they took
him hundreds of miles away to the forests of Alaska. There a beautiful Indian
girl fell in love with him, but he remained true to Alice. After another year of
wandering in the woods, he set out with the diamonds--"
"What diamonds?" asked the unimportant passenger, almost with acerbity.
"The ones the saddlemaker showed him in the Peruvian temple," said the
other, somewhat obscurely. "When he reached home, Alice's mother led him,
weeping, to a green mound under a willow tree. 'Her heart was broken when
you left,' said her mother. 'And what of my rival--of Chester McIntosh?' asked
Mr. Redruth, as he knelt sadly by Alice's grave. 'When he found out,' she
answered, 'that her heart was yours, he pined away day by day until, at length,
he started a furniture store in Grand Rapids. We heard lately that he was bitten
to death by an infuriated moose near South Bend, Ind., where he had gone to
try to forget scenes of civilisation.' With which, Mr. Redruth forsook the face
of mankind and became a hermit, as we have seen.
"My story," concluded the young man with an Agency, "may lack the literary
quality; but what I wanted it to show is that the young lady remained true. She
cared nothing for wealth in comparison with true affection. I admire and
believe in the fair sex too much to think otherwise."
The narrator ceased, with a sidelong glance at the corner where reclined the
lady passenger.
Bildad Rose was next invited by Judge Menefee to contribute his story in the
contest for the apple of judgment. The stage-driver's essay was brief.
"I'm not one of them lobo wolves," he said, "who are always blaming on
women the calamities of life. My testimony in regards to the fiction story you
ask for, Judge, will be about as follows: What ailed Redruth was pure laziness.
If he had up and slugged this Percival De Lacey that tried to give him the
outside of the road, and had kept Alice in the grape-vine swing with the blindbridle on, all would have been well. The woman you want is sure worth taking
pains for.
"'Send for me if you want me again,' says Redruth, and hoists his Stetson, and
walks off. He'd have called it pride, but the nixycomlogical name for it is
laziness. No woman don't like to run after a man. 'Let him come back, hisself,'
says the girl; and I'll be bound she tells the boy with the pay ore to trot; and
then spends her time watching out the window for the man with the empty
pocket-book and the tickly moustache.
"I reckon Redruth waits about nine year expecting her to send him a note by a
nigger asking him to forgive her. But she don't. 'This game won't work,' says
Redruth; 'then so won't I.' And he goes in the hermit business and raises

whiskers. Yes; laziness and whiskers was what done the trick. They travel
together. You ever hear of a man with long whiskers and hair striking a
bonanza? No. Look at the Duke of Marlborough and this Standard Oil snoozer.
Have they got 'em?
"Now, this Alice didn't never marry, I'll bet a hoss. If Redruth had married
somebody else she might have done so, too. But he never turns up. She has
these here things they call fond memories, and maybe a lock of hair and a
corset steel that he broke, treasured up. Them sort of articles is as good as a
husband to some women. I'd say she played out a lone hand. I don't blame no
woman for old man Redruth's abandonment of barber shops and clean shirts."
Next in order came the passenger who was nobody in particular. Nameless to
us, he travels the road from Paradise to Sunrise City.
But him you shall see, if the firelight be not too dim, as he responds to the
Judge's call.
A lean form, in rusty-brown clothing, sitting like a frog, his arms wrapped
about his legs, his chin resting upon his knees. Smooth, oakum-coloured hair;
long nose; mouth like a satyr's, with upturned, tobacco-stained corners. An eye
like a fish's; a red necktie with a horseshoe pin. He began with a rasping
chuckle that gradually formed itself into words.
"Everybody wrong so far. What! a romance without any orange blossoms! Ho,
ho! My money on the lad with the butterfly tie and the certified checks in his
trouserings.
"Take 'em as they parted at the gate? All right. 'You never loved me,' says
Redruth, wildly, 'or you wouldn't speak to a man who can buy you the icecream.' 'I hate him,' says she. 'I loathe his side-bar buggy; I despise the elegant
cream bonbons he sends me in gilt boxes covered with real lace; I feel that I
could stab him to the heart when he presents me with a solid medallion locket
with turquoises and pearls running in a vine around the border. Away with
him! 'Tis only you I love.' 'Back to the cosey corner!' says Redruth. 'Was I
bound and lettered in East Aurora? Get platonic, if you please. No jack-pots
for mine. Go and hate your friend some more. For me the Nickerson girl on
Avenue B, and gum, and a trolley ride.'
"Around that night comes John W. Croesus. 'What! tears?' says he, arranging
his pearl pin. 'You have driven my lover away,' says little Alice, sobbing: 'I
hate the sight of you.' 'Marry me, then,' says John W., lighting a Henry Clay.
'What!' she cries indignantly, 'marry you! Never,' she says, 'until this blows
over, and I can do some shopping, and you see about the licence. There's a
telephone next door if you want to call up the county clerk.'"
The narrator paused to give vent to his cynical chuckle.

"Did they marry?" he continued. "Did the duck swallow the June-bug? And
then I take up the case of Old Boy Redruth. There's where you are all wrong
again, according to my theory. What turned him into a hermit? One says
laziness; one says remorse; one says booze. I say women did it. How old is the
old man now?" asked the speaker, turning to Bildad Rose.
"I should say about sixty-five."
"All right. He conducted his hermit shop here for twenty years. Say he was
twenty-five when he took off his hat at the gate. That leaves twenty years for
him to account for, or else be docked. Where did he spend that ten and two
fives? I'll give you my idea. Up for bigamy. Say there was the fat blonde in
Saint Jo, and the panatela brunette at Skillet Ridge, and the gold tooth down in
the Kaw valley. Redruth gets his cases mixed, and they send him up the road.
He gets out after they are through with him, and says: 'Any line for me except
the crinoline. The hermit trade is not overdone, and the stenographers never
apply to 'em for work. The jolly hermit's life for me. No more long hairs in the
comb or dill pickles lying around in the cigar tray.' You tell me they pinched
old Redruth for the noodle villa just because he said he was King Solomon?
Figs! He /was/ Solomon. That's all of mine. I guess it don't call for any apples.
Enclosed find stamps. It don't sound much like a prize winner."
Respecting the stricture laid by Judge Menefee against comments upon the
stories, all were silent when the passenger who was nobody in particular had
concluded. And then the ingenious originator of the contest cleared his throat
to begin the ultimate entry for the prize. Though seated with small comfort
upon the floor, you might search in vain for any abatement of dignity in Judge
Menefee. The now diminishing firelight played softly upon his face, as clearly
chiselled as a Roman emperor's on some old coin, and upon the thick waves of
his honourable grey hair.
"A woman's heart!" he began, in even but thrilling tones--"who can hope to
fathom it? The ways and desires of men are various. I think that the hearts of
all women beat with the same rhythm, and to the same old tune of love. Love,
to a woman, means sacrifice. If she be worthy of the name, no gold or rank
will outweigh with her a genuine devotion.
"Gentlemen of the--er--I should say, my friends, the case of Redruth /versus/
love and affection has been called. Yet, who is on trial? Not Redruth, for he
has been punished. Not those immortal passions that clothe our lives with the
joy of the angels. Then who? Each man of us here to-night stands at the bar to
answer if chivalry or darkness inhabits his bosom. To judge us sits womankind
in the form of one of its fairest flowers. In her hand she holds the prize,
intrinsically insignificant, but worthy of our noblest efforts to win as a
guerdon of approval from so worthy a representative of feminine judgment
and taste.

"In taking up the imaginary history of Redruth and the fair being to whom he
gave his heart, I must, in the beginning, raise my voice against the unworthy
insinuation that the selfishness or perfidy or love of luxury of any woman
drove him to renounce the world. I have not found woman to be so unspiritual
or venal. We must seek elsewhere, among man's baser nature and lower
motives for the cause.
"There was, in all probability, a lover's quarrel as they stood at the gate on that
memorable day. Tormented by jealousy, young Redruth vanished from his
native haunts. But had he just cause to do so? There is no evidence for or
against. But there is something higher than evidence; there is the grand, eternal
belief in woman's goodness, in her steadfastness against temptation, in her
loyalty even in the face of proffered riches.
"I picture to myself the rash lover, wandering, self-tortured, about the world. I
picture his gradual descent, and, finally, his complete despair when he realises
that he has lost the most precious gift life had to offer him. Then his
withdrawal from the world of sorrow and the subsequent derangement of his
faculties becomes intelligible.
"But what do I see on the other hand? A lonely woman fading away as the
years roll by; still faithful, still waiting, still watching for a form and listening
for a step that will come no more. She is old now. Her hair is white and
smoothly banded. Each day she sits at the door and gazes longingly down the
dusty road. In spirit she is waiting there at the gate, just as he left her--his
forever, but not here below. Yes; my belief in woman paints that picture in my
mind. Parted forever on earth, but waiting! She in anticipation of a meeting in
Elysium; he in the Slough of Despond."
"I thought he was in the bughouse," said the passenger who was nobody in
particular.
Judge Menefee stirred, a little impatiently. The men sat, drooping, in grotesque
attitudes. The wind had abated its violence; coming now in fitful, virulent
puffs. The fire had burned to a mass of red coals which shed but a dim light
within the room. The lady passenger in her cosey nook looked to be but a
formless dark bulk, crowned by a mass of coiled, sleek hair and showing but a
small space of snowy forehead above her clinging boa.
Judge Menefee got stiffly to his feet.
"And now, Miss Garland," he announced, "we have concluded. It is for you to
award the prize to the one of us whose argument--especially, I may say, in
regard to his estimate of true womanhood--approaches nearest to your own
conception."
No answer came from the lady passenger. Judge Menefee bent over
solicitously. The passenger who was nobody in particular laughed low and

harshly. The lady was sleeping sweetly. The Judge essayed to take her hand to
awaken her. In doing so he touched a small, cold, round, irregular something
in her lap.
"She has eaten the apple," announced Judge Menefee, in awed tones, as he
held up the core for them to see.

XIII
THE MISSING CHORD
I stopped overnight at the sheep-ranch of Rush Kinney, on the Sandy Fork of
the Nueces. Mr. Kinney and I had been strangers up to the time when I called
"Hallo!" at his hitching-rack; but from that moment until my departure on the
next morning we were, according to the Texas code, undeniable friends.
After supper the ranchman and I lugged our chairs outside the two-room
house, to its floorless gallery roofed with chaparral and sacuista grass. With
the rear legs of our chairs sinking deep into the hardpacked loam, each of us
reposed against an elm pillar of the structure and smoked El Toro tobacco,
while we wrangled amicably concerning the affairs of the rest of the world.
As for conveying adequate conception of the engaging charm of that prairie
evening, despair waits upon it. It is a bold chronicler who will undertake the
description of a Texas night in the early spring. An inventory must suffice.
The ranch rested upon the summit of a lenient slope. The ambient prairie,
diversified by arroyos and murky patches of brush and pear, lay around us like
a darkened bowl at the bottom of which we reposed as dregs. Like a turquoise
cover the sky pinned us there. The miraculous air, heady with ozone and made
memorably sweet by leagues of wild flowerets, gave tang and savour to the
breath. In the sky was a great, round, mellow searchlight which we knew to be
no moon, but the dark lantern of summer, who came to hunt northward the
cowering spring. In the nearest corral a flock of sheep lay silent until a
groundless panic would send a squad of them huddling together with a
drumming rush. For other sounds a shrill family of coyotes yapped beyond the
shearing-pen, and whippoorwills twittered in the long grass. But even these
dissonances hardly rippled the clear torrent of the mocking-birds' notes that
fell from a dozen neighbouring shrubs and trees. It would not have been
preposterous for one to tiptoe and essay to touch the stars, they hung so bright
and imminent.
Mr. Kinney's wife, a young and capable woman, we had left in the house. She
remained to busy herself with the domestic round of duties, in which I had
observed that she seemed to take a buoyant and contented pride. In one room

we had supped. Presently, from the other, as Kinney and I sat without, there
burst a volume of sudden and brilliant music. If I could justly estimate the art
of piano-playing, the construer of that rollicking fantasia had creditably
mastered the secrets of the keyboard. A piano, and one so well played, seemed
to me to be an unusual thing to find in that small and unpromising ranchhouse. I must have looked my surprise at Rush Kinney, for he laughed in his
soft, Southern way, and nodded at me through the moonlit haze of our
cigarettes.
"You don't often hear as agreeable a noise as that on a sheep-ranch," he
remarked; "but I never see any reason for not playing up to the arts and graces
just because we happen to live out in the brush. It's a lonesome life for a
woman; and if a little music can make it any better, why not have it? That's the
way I look at it."
"A wise and generous theory," I assented. "And Mrs. Kinney plays well. I am
not learned in the science of music, but I should call her an uncommonly good
performer. She has technic and more than ordinary power."
The moon was very bright, you will understand, and I saw upon Kinney's face
a sort of amused and pregnant expression, as though there were things behind
it that might be expounded.
"You came up the trail from the Double-Elm Fork," he said promisingly. "As
you crossed it you must have seen an old deserted /jacal/ to your left under a
comma mott."
"I did," said I. "There was a drove of /javalis/ rooting around it. I could see by
the broken corrals that no one lived there."
"That's where this music proposition started," said Kinney. "I don't mind
telling you about it while we smoke. That's where old Cal Adams lived. He
had about eight hundred graded merinos and a daughter that was solid silk and
as handsome as a new stake-rope on a thirty-dollar pony. And I don't mind
telling you that I was guilty in the second degree of hanging around old Cal's
ranch all the time I could spare away from lambing and shearing. Miss Marilla
was her name; and I had figured it out by the rule of two that she was destined
to become the chatelaine and lady superior of Rancho Lomito, belonging to R.
Kinney, Esq., where you are now a welcome and honoured guest.
"I will say that old Cal wasn't distinguished as a sheepman. He was a little, old
stoop-shouldered /hombre/ about as big as a gun scabbard, with scraggy white
whiskers, and condemned to the continuous use of language. Old Cal was so
obscure in his chosen profession that he wasn't even hated by the cowmen.
And when a sheepman don't get eminent enough to acquire the hostility of the
cattlemen, he is mighty apt to die unwept and considerably unsung.
"But that Marilla girl was a benefit to the eye. And she was the most elegant

kind of a housekeeper. I was the nearest neighbour, and I used to ride over to
the Double-Elm anywhere from nine to sixteen times a week with fresh butter
or a quarter of venison or a sample of new sheep-dip just as a frivolous excuse
to see Marilla. Marilla and me got to be extensively inveigled with each other,
and I was pretty sure I was going to get my rope around her neck and lead her
over to the Lomito. Only she was so everlastingly permeated with filial
sentiments toward old Cal that I never could get her to talk about serious
matters.
"You never saw anybody in your life that was as full of knowledge and had
less sense than old Cal. He was advised about all the branches of information
contained in learning, and he was up to all the rudiments of doctrines and
enlightenment. You couldn't advance him any ideas on any of the parts of
speech or lines of thought. You would have thought he was a professor of the
weather and politics and chemistry and natural history and the origin of
derivations. Any subject you brought up old Cal could give you an abundant
synopsis of it from the Greek root up to the time it was sacked and on the
market.
"One day just after the fall shearing I rides over to the Double-Elm with a
lady's magazine about fashions for Marilla and a scientific paper for old Cal.
"While I was tying my pony to a mesquite, out runs Marilla, 'tickled to death'
with some news that couldn't wait.
"'Oh, Rush,' she says, all flushed up with esteem and gratification, 'what do
you think! Dad's going to buy me a piano. Ain't it grand? I never dreamed I'd
ever have one."
"'It's sure joyful,' says I. 'I always admired the agreeable uproar of a piano. It'll
be lots of company for you. That's mighty good of Uncle Cal to do that.'
"'I'm all undecided,' says Marilla, 'between a piano and an organ. A parlour
organ is nice.'
"'Either of 'em,' says I, 'is first-class for mitigating the lack of noise around a
sheep-ranch. For my part,' I says, 'I shouldn't like anything better than to ride
home of an evening and listen to a few waltzes and jigs, with somebody about
your size sitting on the piano- stool and rounding up the notes.'
"'Oh, hush about that,' says Marilla, 'and go on in the house. Dad hasn't rode
out to-day. He's not feeling well.'
"Old Cal was inside, lying on a cot. He had a pretty bad cold and cough. I
stayed to supper.
"'Going to get Marilla a piano, I hear,' says I to him.
"'Why, yes, something of the kind, Rush,' says he. 'She's been hankering for
music for a long spell; and I allow to fix her up with something in that line

right away. The sheep sheared six pounds all round this fall; and I'm going to
get Marilla an instrument if it takes the price of the whole clip to do it.'
"'/Star wayno/,' says I. 'The little girl deserves it.'
"'I'm going to San Antone on the last load of wool,' says Uncle Cal, 'and select
an instrument for her myself.'
"'Wouldn't it be better,' I suggests, 'to take Marilla along and let her pick out
one that she likes?'
"I might have known that would set Uncle Cal going. Of course, a man like
him, that knew everything about everything, would look at that as a reflection
on his attainments.
"'No, sir, it wouldn't,' says he, pulling at his white whiskers. 'There ain't a
better judge of musical instruments in the whole world than what I am. I had
an uncle,' says he, 'that was a partner in a piano-factory, and I've seen
thousands of 'em put together. I know all about musical instruments from a
pipe-organ to a corn-stalk fiddle. There ain't a man lives, sir, that can tell me
any news about any instrument that has to be pounded, blowed, scraped,
grinded, picked, or wound with a key.'
"'You get me what you like, dad,' says Marilla, who couldn't keep her feet on
the floor from joy. 'Of course you know what to select. I'd just as lief it was a
piano or a organ or what.'
"'I see in St. Louis once what they call a orchestrion,' says Uncle Cal, 'that I
judged was about the finest thing in the way of music ever invented. But there
ain't room in this house for one. Anyway, I imagine they'd cost a thousand
dollars. I reckon something in the piano line would suit Marilla the best. She
took lessons in that respect for two years over at Birdstail. I wouldn't trust the
buying of an instrument to anybody else but myself. I reckon if I hadn't took
up sheep-raising I'd have been one of the finest composers or piano- and-organ
manufacturers in the world.'
"That was Uncle Cal's style. But I never lost any patience with him, on
account of his thinking so much of Marilla. And she thought just as much of
him. He sent her to the academy over at Birdstail for two years when it took
nearly every pound of wool to pay the expenses.
"Along about Tuesday Uncle Cal put out for San Antone on the last
wagonload of wool. Marilla's uncle Ben, who lived in Birdstail, come over and
stayed at the ranch while Uncle Cal was gone.
"It was ninety miles to San Antone, and forty to the nearest railroad- station,
so Uncle Cal was gone about four days. I was over at the Double-Elm when he
came rolling back one evening about sundown. And up there in the wagon,
sure enough, was a piano or a organ--we couldn't tell which--all wrapped up in

woolsacks, with a wagon-sheet tied over it in case of rain. And out skips
Marilla, hollering, 'Oh, oh!' with her eyes shining and her hair a-flying. 'Dad-dad,' she sings out, 'have you brought it--have you brought it?'--and it right
there before her eyes, as women will do.
"'Finest piano in San Antone,' says Uncle Cal, waving his hand, proud.
'Genuine rosewood, and the finest, loudest tone you ever listened to. I heard
the storekeeper play it, and I took it on the spot and paid cash down.'
"Me and Ben and Uncle Cal and a Mexican lifted it out of the wagon and
carried it in the house and set it in a corner. It was one of them upright
instruments, and not very heavy or very big.
"And then all of a sudden Uncle Cal flops over and says he's mighty sick. He's
got a high fever, and he complains of his lungs. He gets into bed, while me and
Ben goes out to unhitch and put the horses in the pasture, and Marilla flies
around to get Uncle Cal something hot to drink. But first she puts both arms
on that piano and hugs it with a soft kind of a smile, like you see kids doing
with their Christmas toys.
"When I came in from the pasture, Marilla was in the room where the piano
was. I could see by the strings and woolsacks on the floor that she had had it
unwrapped. But now she was tying the wagon-sheet over it again, and there
was a kind of solemn, whitish look on her face.
"'Ain't wrapping up the music again, are you, Marilla?' I asks. 'What's the
matter with just a couple of tunes for to see how she goes under the saddle?'
"'Not to-night, Rush,' says she. 'I don't want to play any to-night. Dad's too
sick. Just think, Rush, he paid three hundred dollars for it --nearly a third of
what the wool-clip brought!'
"'Well, it ain't anyways in the neighbourhood of a third of what you are worth,'
I told her. 'And I don't think Uncle Cal is too sick to hear a little agitation of
the piano-keys just to christen the machine.
"'Not to-night, Rush,' says Marilla, in a way that she had when she wanted to
settle things.
"But it seems that Uncle Cal was plenty sick, after all. He got so bad that Ben
saddled up and rode over to Birdstail for Doc Simpson. I stayed around to see
if I'd be needed for anything.
"When Uncle Cal's pain let up on him a little he called Marilla and says to her:
'Did you look at your instrument, honey? And do you like it?'
"'It's lovely, dad,' says she, leaning down by his pillow; 'I never saw one so
pretty. How dear and good it was of you to buy it for me!'
"'I haven't heard you play on it any yet,' says Uncle Cal; 'and I've been

listening. My side don't hurt quite so bad now--won't you play a piece,
Marilla?'
"But no; she puts Uncle Cal off and soothes him down like you've seen
women do with a kid. It seems she's made up her mind not to touch that piano
at present.
"When Doc Simpson comes over he tells us that Uncle Cal has pneumonia the
worst kind; and as the old man was past sixty and nearly on the lift anyhow,
the odds was against his walking on grass any more.
"On the fourth day of his sickness he calls for Marilla again and wants to talk
piano. Doc Simpson was there, and so was Ben and Mrs. Ben, trying to do all
they could.
"'I'd have made a wonderful success in anything connected with music,' says
Uncle Cal. 'I got the finest instrument for the money in San Antone. Ain't that
piano all right in every respect, Marilla?'
"'It's just perfect, dad,' says she. 'It's got the finest tone I ever heard. But don't
you think you could sleep a little while now, dad?'
"'No, I don't,' says Uncle Cal. 'I want to hear that piano. I don't believe you've
even tried it yet. I went all the way to San Antone and picked it out for you
myself. It took a third of the fall clip to buy it; but I don't mind that if it makes
my good girl happier. Won't you play a little bit for dad, Marilla?'
"Doc Simpson beckoned Marilla to one side and recommended her to do what
Uncle Cal wanted, so it would get him quieted. And her uncle Ben and his
wife asked her, too.
"'Why not hit out a tune or two with the soft pedal on?' I asks Marilla. 'Uncle
Cal has begged you so often. It would please him a good deal to hear you
touch up the piano he's bought for you. Don't you think you might?'
"But Marilla stands there with big tears rolling down from her eyes and says
nothing. And then she runs over and slips her arm under Uncle Cal's neck and
hugs him tight.
"'Why, last night, dad,' we heard her say, 'I played it ever so much. Honest--I
have been playing it. And it's such a splendid instrument, you don't know how
I love it. Last night I played "Bonnie Dundee" and the "Anvil Polka" and the
"Blue Danube"--and lots of pieces. You must surely have heard me playing a
little, didn't you, dad? I didn't like to play loud when you was so sick.'
"'Well, well,' says Uncle Cal, 'maybe I did. Maybe I did and forgot about it.
My head is a little cranky at times. I heard the man in the store play it fine. I'm
mighty glad you like it, Marilla. Yes, I believe I could go to sleep a while if
you'll stay right beside me till I do.'

"There was where Marilla had me guessing. Much as she thought of that old
man, she wouldn't strike a note on that piano that he'd bought her. I couldn't
imagine why she told him she'd been playing it, for the wagon-sheet hadn't
ever been off of it since she put it back on the same day it come. I knew she
could play a little anyhow, for I'd once heard her snatch some pretty fair
dance-music out of an old piano at the Charco Largo Ranch.
"Well, in about a week the pneumonia got the best of Uncle Cal. They had the
funeral over at Birdstail, and all of us went over. I brought Marilla back home
in my buckboard. Her uncle Ben and his wife were going to stay there a few
days with her.
"That night Marilla takes me in the room where the piano was, while the
others were out on the gallery.
"'Come here, Rush,' says she; 'I want you to see this now.'
"She unties the rope, and drags off the wagon-sheet.
"If you ever rode a saddle without a horse, or fired off a gun that wasn't
loaded, or took a drink out of an empty bottle, why, then you might have been
able to scare an opera or two out of the instrument Uncle Cal had bought.
"Instead of a piano, it was one of the machines they've invented to play the
piano with. By itself it was about as musical as the holes of a flute without the
flute.
"And that was the piano that Uncle Cal had selected; and standing by it was
the good, fine, all-wool girl that never let him know it.
"And what you heard playing a while ago," concluded Mr. Kinney, "was that
same deputy-piano machine; only just at present it's shoved up against a sixhundred-dollar piano that I bought for Marilla as soon as we was
married."

XIV
A CALL LOAN
In those days the cattlemen were the anointed. They were the grandees of the
grass, kings of the kine, lords of the lea, barons of beef and bone. They might
have ridden in golden chariots had their tastes so inclined. The cattleman was
caught in a stampede of dollars. It seemed to him that he had more money than
was decent. But when he had bought a watch with precious stones set in the
case so large that they hurt his ribs, and a California saddle with silver nails
and Angora skin /suaderos/, and ordered everybody up to the bar for whisky--

what else was there for him to spend money for?
Not so circumscribed in expedient for the reduction of surplus wealth were
those lairds of the lariat who had womenfolk to their name. In the breast of the
rib-sprung sex the genius of purse lightening may slumber through years of
inopportunity, but never, my brothers, does it become extinct.
So, out of the chaparral came Long Bill Longley from the Bar Circle Branch
on the Frio--a wife-driven man--to taste the urban joys of success. Something
like half a million dollars he had, with an income steadily increasing.
Long Bill was a graduate of the camp and trail. Luck and thrift, a cool head,
and a telescopic eye for mavericks had raised him from cowboy to be a
cowman. Then came the boom in cattle, and Fortune, stepping gingerly among
the cactus thorns, came and emptied her cornucopia at the doorstep of the
ranch.
In the little frontier city of Chaparosa, Longley built a costly residence. Here
he became a captive, bound to the chariot of social existence. He was doomed
to become a leading citizen. He struggled for a time like a mustang in his first
corral, and then he hung up his quirt and spurs. Time hung heavily on his
hands. He organised the First National Bank of Chaparosa, and was elected its
president.
One day a dyspeptic man, wearing double-magnifying glasses, inserted an
official-looking card between the bars of the cashier's window of the First
National Bank. Five minutes later the bank force was dancing at the beck and
call of a national bank examiner.
This examiner, Mr. J. Edgar Todd, proved to be a thorough one.
At the end of it all the examiner put on his hat, and called the president, Mr.
William R. Longley, into the private office.
"Well, how do you find things?" asked Longley, in his slow, deep tones. "Any
brands in the round-up you didn't like the looks of?"
"The bank checks up all right, Mr. Longley," said Todd; "and I find your loans
in very good shape--with one exception. You are carrying one very bad bit of
paper--one that is so bad that I have been thinking that you surely do not
realise the serious position it places you in. I refer to a call loan of $10,000
made to Thomas Merwin. Not only is the amount in excess of the maximum
sum the bank can loan any individual legally, but it is absolutely without
endorsement or security. Thus you have doubly violated the national banking
laws, and have laid yourself open to criminal prosecution by the Government.
A report of the matter to the Comptroller of the Currency--which I am bound
to make--would, I am sure, result in the matter being turned over to the
Department of Justice for action. You see what a serious thing it is."

Bill Longley was leaning his lengthy, slowly moving frame back in his swivel
chair. His hands were clasped behind his head, and he turned a little to look
the examiner in the face. The examiner was surprised to see a smile creep
about the rugged mouth of the banker, and a kindly twinkle in his light-blue
eyes. If he saw the seriousness of the affair, it did not show in his countenance.
"Of course, you don't know Tom Merwin," said Longley, almost genially.
"Yes, I know about that loan. It hasn't any security except Tom Merwin's word.
Somehow, I've always found that when a man's word is good it's the best
security there is. Oh, yes, I know the Government doesn't think so. I guess I'll
see Tom about that note."
Mr. Todd's dyspepsia seemed to grow suddenly worse. He looked at the
chaparral banker through his double-magnifying glasses in amazement.
"You see," said Longley, easily explaining the thing away, "Tom heard of 2000
head of two-year-olds down near Rocky Ford on the Rio Grande that could be
had for $8 a head. I reckon 'twas one of old Leandro Garcia's outfits that he
had smuggled over, and he wanted to make a quick turn on 'em. Those cattle
are worth $15 on the hoof in Kansas City. Tom knew it and I knew it. He had
$6,000, and I let him have the $10,000 to make the deal with. His brother Ed
took 'em on to market three weeks ago. He ought to be back 'most any day
now with the money. When he comes Tom'll pay that note."
The bank examiner was shocked. It was, perhaps, his duty to step out to the
telegraph office and wire the situation to the Comptroller. But he did not. He
talked pointedly and effectively to Longley for three minutes. He succeeded in
making the banker understand that he stood upon the border of a catastrophe.
And then he offered a tiny loophole of escape.
"I am going to Hilldale's to-night," he told Longley, "to examine a bank there.
I will pass through Chaparosa on my way back. At twelve o'clock to-morrow I
shall call at this bank. If this loan has been cleared out of the way by that time
it will not be mentioned in my report. If not--I will have to do my duty."
With that the examiner bowed and departed.
The President of the First National lounged in his chair half an hour longer,
and then he lit a mild cigar, and went over to Tom Merwin's house. Merwin, a
ranchman in brown duck, with a contemplative eye, sat with his feet upon a
table, plaiting a rawhide quirt.
"Tom," said Longley, leaning against the table, "you heard anything from Ed
yet?"
"Not yet," said Merwin, continuing his plaiting. "I guess Ed'll be along back
now in a few days."
"There was a bank examiner," said Longley, "nosing around our place to-day,

and he bucked a sight about that note of yours. You know I know it's all right,
but the thing /is/ against the banking laws. I was pretty sure you'd have paid it
off before the bank was examined again, but the son-of-a-gun slipped in on us,
Tom. Now, I'm short of cash myself just now, or I'd let you have the money to
take it up with. I've got till twelve o'clock to-morrow, and then I've got to show
the cash in place of that note or--"
"Or what, Bill?" asked Merwin, as Longley hesitated.
"Well, I suppose it means be jumped on with both of Uncle Sam's feet."
"I'll try to raise the money for you on time," said Merwin, interested in his
plaiting.
"All right, Tom," concluded Longley, as he turned toward the door; "I knew
you would if you could."
Merwin threw down his whip and went to the only other bank in town, a
private one, run by Cooper & Craig.
"Cooper," he said, to the partner by that name, "I've got to have $10,000 today or to-morrow. I've got a house and lot there that's worth about $6,000 and
that's all the actual collateral. But I've got a cattle deal on that's sure to bring
me in more than that much profit within a few days."
Cooper began to cough.
"Now, for God's sake don't say no," said Merwin. "I owe that much money on
a call loan. It's been called, and the man that called it is a man I've laid on the
same blanket with in cow-camps and ranger-camps for ten years. He can call
anything I've got. He can call the blood out of my veins and it'll come. He's
got to have the money. He's in a devil of a--Well, he needs the money, and I've
got to get it for him. You know my word's good, Cooper."
"No doubt of it," assented Cooper, urbanely, "but I've a partner, you know. I'm
not free in making loans. And even if you had the best security in your hands,
Merwin, we couldn't accommodate you in less than a week. We're just making
a shipment of $15,000 to Myer Brothers in Rockdell, to buy cotton with. It
goes down on the narrow-gauge to-night. That leaves our cash quite short at
present. Sorry we can't arrange it for you."
Merwin went back to his little bare office and plaited at his quirt again. About
four o'clock in the afternoon he went to the First National Bank and leaned
over the railing of Longley's desk.
"I'll try to get that money for you to-night--I mean to-morrow, Bill."
"All right, Tom," said Longley quietly.
At nine o'clock that night Tom Merwin stepped cautiously out of the small
frame house in which he lived. It was near the edge of the little town, and few

citizens were in the neighbourhood at that hour. Merwin wore two six-shooters
in a belt, and a slouch hat. He moved swiftly down a lonely street, and then
followed the sandy road that ran parallel to the narrow-gauge track until he
reached the water- tank, two miles below the town. There Tom Merwin
stopped, tied a black silk handkerchief about the lower part of his face, and
pulled his hat down low.
In ten minutes the night train for Rockdell pulled up at the tank, having come
from Chaparosa.
With a gun in each hand Merwin raised himself from behind a clump of
chaparral and started for the engine. But before he had taken three steps, two
long, strong arms clasped him from behind, and he was lifted from his feet and
thrown, face downward upon the grass. There was a heavy knee pressing
against his back, and an iron hand grasping each of his wrists. He was held
thus, like a child, until the engine had taken water, and until the train had
moved, with accelerating speed, out of sight. Then he was released, and rose
to his feet to face Bill Longley.
"The case never needed to be fixed up this way, Tom," said Longley. "I saw
Cooper this evening, and he told me what you and him talked about. Then I
went down to your house to-night and saw you come out with your guns on,
and I followed you. Let's go back, Tom."
They walked away together, side by side.
"'Twas the only chance I saw," said Merwin presently. "You called your loan,
and I tried to answer you. Now, what'll you do, Bill, if they sock it to you?"
"What would you have done if they'd socked it to you?" was the answer
Longley made.
"I never thought I'd lay in a bush to stick up a train," remarked Merwin; "but a
call loan's different. A call's a call with me. We've got twelve hours yet, Bill,
before this spy jumps onto you. We've got to raise them spondulicks somehow.
Maybe we can--Great Sam Houston! do you hear that?"
Merwin broke into a run, and Longley kept with him, hearing only a rather
pleasing whistle somewhere in the night rendering the lugubrious air of "The
Cowboy's Lament."
"It's the only tune he knows," shouted Merwin, as he ran. "I'll bet--"
They were at the door of Merwin's house. He kicked it open and fell over an
old valise lying in the middle of the floor. A sunburned, firm-jawed youth,
stained by travel, lay upon the bed puffing at a brown cigarette.
"What's the word, Ed?" gasped Merwin.
"So, so," drawled that capable youngster. "Just got in on the 9:30. Sold the

bunch for fifteen, straight. Now, buddy, you want to quit kickin' a valise
around that's got $29,000 in greenbacks in its in'ards."

XV
THE PRINCESS AND THE PUMA
There had to be a king and queen, of course. The king was a terrible old man
who wore six-shooters and spurs, and shouted in such a tremendous voice that
the rattlers on the prairie would run into their holes under the prickly pear.
Before there was a royal family they called the man "Whispering Ben." When
he came to own 50,000 acres of land and more cattle than he could count, they
called him O'Donnell "the Cattle King."
The queen had been a Mexican girl from Laredo. She made a good, mild,
Colorado-claro wife, and even succeeded in teaching Ben to modify his voice
sufficiently while in the house to keep the dishes from being broken. When
Ben got to be king she would sit on the gallery of Espinosa Ranch and weave
rush mats. When wealth became so irresistible and oppressive that upholstered
chairs and a centre table were brought down from San Antone in the wagons,
she bowed her smooth, dark head, and shared the fate of the Danae.
To avoid /lese-majeste/ you have been presented first to the king and queen.
They do not enter the story, which might be called "The Chronicle of the
Princess, the Happy Thought, and the Lion that Bungled his Job."
Josefa O'Donnell was the surviving daughter, the princess. From her mother
she inherited warmth of nature and a dusky, semi-tropic beauty. From Ben
O'Donnell the royal she acquired a store of intrepidity, common sense, and the
faculty of ruling. The combination was one worth going miles to see. Josefa
while riding her pony at a gallop could put five out of six bullets through a
tomato-can swinging at the end of a string. She could play for hours with a
white kitten she owned, dressing it in all manner of absurd clothes. Scorning a
pencil, she could tell you out of her head what 1545 two-year-olds would
bring on the hoof, at $8.50 per head. Roughly speaking, the Espinosa Ranch is
forty miles long and thirty broad--but mostly leased land. Josefa, on her pony,
had prospected over every mile of it. Every cow-puncher on the range knew
her by sight and was a loyal vassal. Ripley Givens, foreman of one of the
Espinosa outfits, saw her one day, and made up his mind to form a royal
matrimonial alliance. Presumptuous? No. In those days in the Nueces country
a man was a man. And, after all, the title of cattle king does not presuppose
blood royalty. Often it only signifies that its owner wears the crown in token
of his magnificent qualities in the art of cattle stealing.

One day Ripley Givens rode over to the Double Elm Ranch to inquire about a
bunch of strayed yearlings. He was late in setting out on his return trip, and it
was sundown when he struck the White Horse Crossing of the Nueces. From
there to his own camp it was sixteen miles. To the Espinosa ranch it was
twelve. Givens was tired. He decided to pass the night at the Crossing.
There was a fine water hole in the river-bed. The banks were thickly covered
with great trees, undergrown with brush. Back from the water hole fifty yards
was a stretch of curly mesquite grass--supper for his horse and bed for himself.
Givens staked his horse, and spread out his saddle blankets to dry. He sat
down with his back against a tree and rolled a cigarette. From somewhere in
the dense timber along the river came a sudden, rageful, shivering wail. The
pony danced at the end of his rope and blew a whistling snort of
comprehending fear. Givens puffed at his cigarette, but he reached leisurely
for his pistol-belt, which lay on the grass, and twirled the cylinder of his
weapon tentatively. A great gar plunged with a loud splash into the water hole.
A little brown rabbit skipped around a bunch of catclaw and sat twitching his
whiskers and looking humorously at Givens. The pony went on eating grass.
It is well to be reasonably watchful when a Mexican lion sings soprano along
the arroyos at sundown. The burden of his song may be that young calves and
fat lambs are scarce, and that he has a carnivorous desire for your
acquaintance.
In the grass lay an empty fruit can, cast there by some former sojourner.
Givens caught sight of it with a grunt of satisfaction. In his coat pocket tied
behind his saddle was a handful or two of ground coffee. Black coffee and
cigarettes! What ranchero could desire more?
In two minutes he had a little fire going clearly. He started, with his can, for
the water hole. When within fifteen yards of its edge he saw, between the
bushes, a side-saddled pony with down-dropped reins cropping grass a little
distance to his left. Just rising from her hands and knees on the brink of the
water hole was Josefa O'Donnell. She had been drinking water, and she
brushed the sand from the palms of her hands. Ten yards away, to her right,
half concealed by a clump of sacuista, Givens saw the crouching form of the
Mexican lion. His amber eyeballs glared hungrily; six feet from them was the
tip of the tail stretched straight, like a pointer's. His hind-quarters rocked with
the motion of the cat tribe preliminary to leaping.
Givens did what he could. His six-shooter was thirty-five yards away lying on
the grass. He gave a loud yell, and dashed between the lion and the princess.
The "rucus," as Givens called it afterward, was brief and somewhat confused.
When he arrived on the line of attack he saw a dim streak in the air, and heard
a couple of faint cracks. Then a hundred pounds of Mexican lion plumped

down upon his head and flattened him, with a heavy jar, to the ground. He
remembered calling out: "Let up, now--no fair gouging!" and then he crawled
from under the lion like a worm, with his mouth full of grass and dirt, and a
big lump on the back of his head where it had struck the root of a water-elm.
The lion lay motionless. Givens, feeling aggrieved, and suspicious of fouls,
shook his fist at the lion, and shouted: "I'll rastle you again for twenty--" and
then he got back to himself.
Josefa was standing in her tracks, quietly reloading her silver- mounted .38. It
had not been a difficult shot. The lion's head made an easier mark than a
tomato-can swinging at the end of a string. There was a provoking, teasing,
maddening smile upon her mouth and in her dark eyes. The would-be-rescuing
knight felt the fire of his fiasco burn down to his soul. Here had been his
chance, the chance that he had dreamed of; and Momus, and not Cupid, had
presided over it. The satyrs in the wood were, no doubt, holding their sides in
hilarious, silent laughter. There had been something like vaudeville--say
Signor Givens and his funny knockabout act with the stuffed lion.
"Is that you, Mr. Givens?" said Josefa, in her deliberate, saccharine contralto.
"You nearly spoilt my shot when you yelled. Did you hurt your head when you
fell?"
"Oh, no," said Givens, quietly; "that didn't hurt." He stooped ignominiously
and dragged his best Stetson hat from under the beast. It was crushed and
wrinkled to a fine comedy effect. Then he knelt down and softly stroked the
fierce, open-jawed head of the dead lion.
"Poor old Bill!" he exclaimed mournfully.
"What's that?" asked Josefa, sharply.
"Of course you didn't know, Miss Josefa," said Givens, with an air of one
allowing magnanimity to triumph over grief. "Nobody can blame you. I tried
to save him, but I couldn't let you know in time."
"Save who?"
"Why, Bill. I've been looking for him all day. You see, he's been our camp pet
for two years. Poor old fellow, he wouldn't have hurt a cottontail rabbit. It'll
break the boys all up when they hear about it. But you couldn't tell, of course,
that Bill was just trying to play with you."
Josefa's black eyes burned steadily upon him. Ripley Givens met the test
successfully. He stood rumpling the yellow-brown curls on his head pensively.
In his eye was regret, not unmingled with a gentle reproach. His smooth
features were set to a pattern of indisputable sorrow. Josefa wavered.
"What was your pet doing here?" she asked, making a last stand. "There's no
camp near the White Horse Crossing."

"The old rascal ran away from camp yesterday," answered Givens readily. "It's
a wonder the coyotes didn't scare him to death. You see, Jim Webster, our
horse wrangler, brought a little terrier pup into camp last week. The pup made
life miserable for Bill--he used to chase him around and chew his hind legs for
hours at a time. Every night when bedtime came Bill would sneak under one
of the boy's blankets and sleep to keep the pup from finding him. I reckon he
must have been worried pretty desperate or he wouldn't have run away. He
was always afraid to get out of sight of camp."
Josefa looked at the body of the fierce animal. Givens gently patted one of the
formidable paws that could have killed a yearling calf with one blow. Slowly a
red flush widened upon the dark olive face of the girl. Was it the signal of
shame of the true sportsman who has brought down ignoble quarry? Her eyes
grew softer, and the lowered lids drove away all their bright mockery.
"I'm very sorry," she said humbly; "but he looked so big, and jumped so high
that--"
"Poor old Bill was hungry," interrupted Givens, in quick defence of the
deceased. "We always made him jump for his supper in camp. He would lie
down and roll over for a piece of meat. When he saw you he thought he was
going to get something to eat from you."
Suddenly Josefa's eyes opened wide.
"I might have shot you!" she exclaimed. "You ran right in between. You risked
your life to save your pet! That was fine, Mr. Givens. I like a man who is kind
to animals."
Yes; there was even admiration in her gaze now. After all, there was a hero
rising out of the ruins of the anti-climax. The look on Givens's face would
have secured him a high position in the S.P.C.A.
"I always loved 'em," said he; "horses, dogs, Mexican lions, cows, alligators--"
"I hate alligators," instantly demurred Josefa; "crawly, muddy things!"
"Did I say alligators?" said Givens. "I meant antelopes, of course."
Josefa's conscience drove her to make further amends. She held out her hand
penitently. There was a bright, unshed drop in each of her eyes.
"Please forgive me, Mr. Givens, won't you? I'm only a girl, you know, and I
was frightened at first. I'm very, very sorry I shot Bill. You don't know how
ashamed I feel. I wouldn't have done it for anything."
Givens took the proffered hand. He held it for a time while he allowed the
generosity of his nature to overcome his grief at the loss of Bill. At last it was
clear that he had forgiven her.
"Please don't speak of it any more, Miss Josefa. 'Twas enough to frighten any

young lady the way Bill looked. I'll explain it all right to the boys."
"Are you really sure you don't hate me?" Josefa came closer to him
impulsively. Her eyes were sweet--oh, sweet and pleading with gracious
penitence. "I would hate anyone who would kill my kitten. And how daring
and kind of you to risk being shot when you tried to save him! How very few
men would have done that!" Victory wrested from defeat! Vaudeville turned
into drama! Bravo, Ripley Givens!
It was now twilight. Of course Miss Josefa could not be allowed to ride on to
the ranch-house alone. Givens resaddled his pony in spite of that animal's
reproachful glances, and rode with her. Side by side they galloped across the
smooth grass, the princess and the man who was kind to animals. The prairie
odours of fruitful earth and delicate bloom were thick and sweet around them.
Coyotes yelping over there on the hill! No fear. And yet-Josefa rode closer. A little hand seemed to grope. Givens found it with his
own. The ponies kept an even gait. The hands lingered together, and the owner
of one explained:
"I never was frightened before, but just think! How terrible it would be to meet
a really wild lion! Poor Bill! I'm so glad you came with me!"
O'Donnell was sitting on the ranch gallery.
"Hello, Rip!" he shouted--"that you?"
"He rode in with me," said Josefa. "I lost my way and was late."
"Much obliged," called the cattle king. "Stop over, Rip, and ride to camp in the
morning."
But Givens would not. He would push on to camp. There was a bunch of
steers to start off on the trail at daybreak. He said good-night, and trotted
away.
An hour later, when the lights were out, Josefa, in her night-robe, came to her
door and called to the king in his own room across the brick-paved hallway:
"Say, pop, you know that old Mexican lion they call the 'Gotch-eared Devil'-the one that killed Gonzales, Mr. Martin's sheep herder, and about fifty calves
on the Salado range? Well, I settled his hash this afternoon over at the White
Horse Crossing. Put two balls in his head with my .38 while he was on the
jump. I knew him by the slice gone from his left ear that old Gonzales cut off
with his machete. You couldn't have made a better shot yourself, daddy."
"Bully for you!" thundered Whispering Ben from the darkness of the royal
chamber.

XVI
THE INDIAN SUMMER OF DRY VALLEY JOHNSON
Dry Valley Johnson shook the bottle. You have to shake the bottle before
using; for sulphur will not dissolve. Then Dry Valley saturated a small sponge
with the liquid and rubbed it carefully into the roots of his hair. Besides
sulphur there was sugar of lead in it and tincture of nux vomica and bay rum.
Dry Valley found the recipe in a Sunday newspaper. You must next be told
why a strong man came to fall a victim to a Beauty Hint.
Dry Valley had been a sheepman. His real name was Hector, but he had been
rechristened after his range to distinguish him from "Elm Creek" Johnson,
who ran sheep further down the Frio.
Many years of living face to face with sheep on their own terms wearied Dry
Valley Johnson. So, he sold his ranch for eighteen thousand dollars and moved
to Santa Rosa to live a life of gentlemanly ease. Being a silent and melancholy
person of thirty-five--or perhaps thirty-eight--he soon became that cursed and
earth-cumbering thing--an elderlyish bachelor with a hobby. Some one gave
him his first strawberry to eat, and he was done for.
Dry Valley bought a four-room cottage in the village, and a library on
strawberry culture. Behind the cottage was a garden of which he made a
strawberry patch. In his old grey woolen shirt, his brown duck trousers, and
high-heeled boots he sprawled all day on a canvas cot under a live-oak tree at
his back door studying the history of the seductive, scarlet berry.
The school teacher, Miss De Witt, spoke of him as "a fine, presentable man,
for all his middle age." But, the focus of Dry Valley's eyes embraced no
women. They were merely beings who flew skirts as a signal for him to lift
awkwardly his heavy, round-crowned, broad-brimmed felt Stetson whenever
he met them, and then hurry past to get back to his beloved berries.
And all this recitative by the chorus is only to bring us to the point where you
may be told why Dry Valley shook up the insoluble sulphur in the bottle. So
long-drawn and inconsequential a thing is history--the anamorphous shadow
of a milestone reaching down the road between us and the setting sun.
When his strawberries were beginning to ripen Dry Valley bought the heaviest
buggy whip in the Santa Rosa store. He sat for many hours under the live oak
tree plaiting and weaving in an extension to its lash. When it was done he
could snip a leaf from a bush twenty feet away with the cracker. For the bright,
predatory eyes of Santa Rosa youth were watching the ripening berries, and
Dry Valley was arming himself against their expected raids. No greater care
had he taken of his tender lambs during his ranching days than he did of his
cherished fruit, warding it from the hungry wolves that whistled and howled

and shot their marbles and peered through the fence that surrounded his
property.
In the house next to Dry Valley's lived a widow with a pack of children that
gave the husbandman frequent anxious misgivings. In the woman there was a
strain of the Spanish. She had wedded one of the name of O'Brien. Dry Valley
was a connoisseur in cross strains; and he foresaw trouble in the offspring of
this union.
Between the two homesteads ran a crazy picket fence overgrown with morning
glory and wild gourd vines. Often he could see little heads with mops of black
hair and flashing dark eyes dodging in and out between the pickets, keeping
tabs on the reddening berries.
Late one afternoon Dry Valley went to the post office. When he came back,
like Mother Hubbard he found the deuce to pay. The descendants of Iberian
bandits and Hibernian cattle raiders had swooped down upon his strawberry
patch. To the outraged vision of Dry Valley there seemed to be a sheep corral
full of them; perhaps they numbered five or six. Between the rows of green
plants they were stooped, hopping about like toads, gobbling silently and
voraciously his finest fruit.
Dry Valley slipped into the house, got his whip, and charged the marauders.
The lash curled about the legs of the nearest--a greedy ten-year-old--before
they knew they were discovered. His screech gave warning; and the flock
scampered for the fence like a drove of /javelis/ flushed in the chaparral. Dry
Valley's whip drew a toll of two more elfin shrieks before they dived through
the vine-clad fence and disappeared.
Dry Valley, less fleet, followed them nearly to the pickets. Checking his
useless pursuit, he rounded a bush, dropped his whip and stood, voiceless,
motionless, the capacity of his powers consumed by the act of breathing and
preserving the perpendicular.
Behind the bush stood Panchita O'Brien, scorning to fly. She was nineteen, the
oldest of the raiders. Her night-black hair was gathered back in a wild mass
and tied with a scarlet ribbon. She stood, with reluctant feet, yet nearer the
brook than to the river; for childhood had environed and detained her.
She looked at Dry Valley Johnson for a moment with magnificent insolence,
and before his eyes slowly crunched a luscious berry between her white teeth.
Then she turned and walked slowly to the fence with a swaying, conscious
motion, such as a duchess might make use of in leading a promenade. There
she turned again and grilled Dry Valley Johnson once more in the dark flame
of her audacious eyes, laughed a trifle school-girlishly, and twisted herself
with pantherish quickness between the pickets to the O'Brien side of the wild
gourd vine.

Dry Valley picked up his whip and went into his house. He stumbled as he
went up the two wooden steps. The old Mexican woman who cooked his
meals and swept his house called him to supper as he went through the rooms.
Dry Valley went on, stumbled down the front steps, out the gate and down the
road into a mesquite thicket at the edge of town. He sat down in the grass and
laboriously plucked the spines from a prickly pear, one by one. This was his
attitude of thought, acquired in the days when his problems were only those of
wind and wool and water.
A thing had happened to the man--a thing that, if you are eligible, you must
pray may pass you by. He had become enveloped in the Indian Summer of the
Soul.
Dry Valley had had no youth. Even his childhood had been one of dignity and
seriousness. At six he had viewed the frivolous gambols of the lambs on his
father's ranch with silent disapproval. His life as a young man had been
wasted. The divine fires and impulses, the glorious exaltations and despairs,
the glow and enchantment of youth had passed above his head. Never a thrill
of Romeo had he known; he was but a melancholy Jaques of the forest with a
ruder philosophy, lacking the bitter-sweet flavour of experience that tempered
the veteran years of the rugged ranger of Arden. And now in his sere and
yellow leaf one scornful look from the eyes of Panchita O'Brien had flooded
the autumnal landscape with a tardy and delusive summer heat.
But a sheepman is a hardy animal. Dry Valley Johnson had weathered too
many northers to turn his back on a late summer, spiritual or real. Old? He
would show them.
By the next mail went an order to San Antonio for an outfit of the latest
clothes, colours and styles and prices no object. The next day went the recipe
for the hair restorer clipped from a newspaper; for Dry Valley's sunburned
auburn hair was beginning to turn silvery above his ears.
Dry Valley kept indoors closely for a week except for frequent sallies after
youthful strawberry snatchers. Then, a few days later, he suddenly emerged
brilliantly radiant in the hectic glow of his belated midsummer madness.
A jay-bird-blue tennis suit covered him outwardly, almost as far as his wrists
and ankles. His shirt was ox-blood; his collar winged and tall; his necktie a
floating oriflamme; his shoes a venomous bright tan, pointed and shaped on
penitential lasts. A little flat straw hat with a striped band desecrated his
weather-beaten head. Lemon-coloured kid gloves protected his oak-tough
hands from the benignant May sunshine. This sad and optic-smiting creature
teetered out of its den, smiling foolishly and smoothing its gloves for men and
angels to see. To such a pass had Dry Valley Johnson been brought by Cupid,
who always shoots game that is out of season with an arrow from the quiver of

Momus. Reconstructing mythology, he had risen, a prismatic macaw, from the
ashes of the grey-brown phoenix that had folded its tired wings to roost under
the trees of Santa Rosa.
Dry Valley paused in the street to allow Santa Rosans within sight of him to be
stunned; and then deliberately and slowly, as his shoes required, entered Mrs.
O'Brien's gate.
Not until the eleven months' drought did Santa Rosa cease talking about Dry
Valley Johnson's courtship of Panchita O'Brien. It was an unclassifiable
procedure; something like a combination of cake- walking, deaf-and-dumb
oratory, postage stamp flirtation and parlour charades. It lasted two weeks and
then came to a sudden end.
Of course Mrs. O'Brien favoured the match as soon as Dry Valley's intentions
were disclosed. Being the mother of a woman child, and therefore a charter
member of the Ancient Order of the Rat-trap, she joyfully decked out Panchita
for the sacrifice. The girl was temporarily dazzled by having her dresses
lengthened and her hair piled up on her head, and came near forgetting that she
was only a slice of cheese. It was nice, too, to have as good a match as Mr.
Johnson paying you attentions and to see the other girls fluttering the curtains
at their windows to see you go by with him.
Dry Valley bought a buggy with yellow wheels and a fine trotter in San
Antonio. Every day he drove out with Panchita. He was never seen to speak to
her when they were walking or driving. The consciousness of his clothes kept
his mind busy; the knowledge that he could say nothing of interest kept him
dumb; the feeling that Panchita was there kept him happy.
He took her to parties and dances, and to church. He tried--oh, no man ever
tried so hard to be young as Dry Valley did. He could not dance; but he
invented a smile which he wore on these joyous occasions, a smile that, in
him, was as great a concession to mirth and gaiety as turning hand-springs
would be in another. He began to seek the company of the young men in the
town--even of the boys. They accepted him as a decided damper, for his
attempts at sportiveness were so forced that they might as well have essayed
their games in a cathedral. Neither he nor any other could estimate what
progress he had made with Panchita.
The end came suddenly in one day, as often disappears the false afterglow
before a November sky and wind.
Dry Valley was to call for the girl one afternoon at six for a walk. An
afternoon walk in Santa Rosa was a feature of social life that called for the
pink of one's wardrobe. So Dry Valley began gorgeously to array himself; and
so early that he finished early, and went over to the O'Brien cottage. As he
neared the porch on the crooked walk from the gate he heard sounds of revelry

within. He stopped and looked through the honeysuckle vines in the open
door.
Panchita was amusing her younger brothers and sisters. She wore a man's
clothes--no doubt those of the late Mr. O'Brien. On her head was the smallest
brother's straw hat decorated with an ink-striped paper band. On her hands
were flapping yellow cloth gloves, roughly cut out and sewn for the
masquerade. The same material covered her shoes, giving them the semblance
of tan leather. High collar and flowing necktie were not omitted.
Panchita was an actress. Dry Valley saw his affectedly youthful gait, his limp
where the right shoe hurt him, his forced smile, his awkward simulation of a
gallant air, all reproduced with startling fidelity. For the first time a mirror had
been held up to him. The corroboration of one of the youngsters calling,
"Mamma, come and see Pancha do like Mr. Johnson," was not needed.
As softly as the caricatured tans would permit, Dry Valley tiptoed back to the
gate and home again.
Twenty minutes after the time appointed for the walk Panchita tripped
demurely out of her gate in a thin, trim white lawn and sailor hat. She strolled
up the sidewalk and slowed her steps at Dry Valley's gate, her manner
expressing wonder at his unusual delinquency.
Then out of his door and down the walk strode--not the polychromatic victim
of a lost summertime, but the sheepman, rehabilitated. He wore his old grey
woolen shirt, open at the throat, his brown duck trousers stuffed into his runover boots, and his white felt sombrero on the back of his head. Twenty years
or fifty he might look; Dry Valley cared not. His light blue eyes met Panchita's
dark ones with a cold flash in them. He came as far as the gate. He pointed
with his long arm to her house.
"Go home," said Dry Valley. "Go home to your mother. I wonder lightnin'
don't strike a fool like me. Go home and play in the sand. What business have
you got cavortin' around with grown men? I reckon I was locoed to be makin'
a he poll-parrot out of myself for a kid like you. Go home and don't let me see
you no more. Why I done it, will somebody tell me? Go home, and let me try
and forget it."
Panchita obeyed and walked slowly toward her home, saying nothing. For
some distance she kept her head turned and her large eyes fixed intrepidly
upon Dry Valley's. At her gate she stood for a moment looking back at him,
then ran suddenly and swiftly into the house.
Old Antonia was building a fire in the kitchen stove. Dry Valley stopped at the
door and laughed harshly.
"I'm a pretty looking old rhinoceros to be gettin' stuck on a kid, ain't I, 'Tonia?"

said he.
"Not verree good thing," agreed Antonia, sagely, "for too much old man to
likee /muchacha/."
"You bet it ain't," said Dry Valley, grimly. "It's dum foolishness; and, besides,
it hurts."
He brought at one armful the regalia of his aberration--the blue tennis suit,
shoes, hat, gloves and all, and threw them in a pile at Antonia's feet.
"Give them to your old man," said he, "to hunt antelope in."
Just as the first star presided palely over the twilight Dry Valley got his biggest
strawberry book and sat on the back steps to catch the last of the reading light.
He thought he saw the figure of someone in his strawberry patch. He laid aside
the book, got his whip and hurried forth to see.
It was Panchita. She had slipped through the picket fence and was half-way
across the patch. She stopped when she saw him and looked at him without
wavering.
A sudden rage--a humiliating flush of unreasoning wrath--came over Dry
Valley. For this child he had made himself a motley to the view. He had tried
to bribe Time to turn backward for himself; he had--been made a fool of. At
last he had seen his folly. There was a gulf between him and youth over which
he could not build a bridge even with yellow gloves to protect his hands. And
the sight of his torment coming to pester him with her elfin pranks--coming to
plunder his strawberry vines like a mischievous schoolboy--roused all his
anger.
"I told you to keep away from here," said Dry Valley. "Go back to your home."
Panchita moved slowly toward him.
Dry Valley cracked his whip.
"Go back home," said Dry Valley, savagely, "and play theatricals some more.
You'd make a fine man. You've made a fine one of me."
She came a step nearer, silent, and with that strange, defiant, steady shine in
her eyes that had always puzzled him. Now it stirred his wrath.
His whiplash whistled through the air. He saw a red streak suddenly come out
through her white dress above her knee where it had struck.
Without flinching and with the same unchanging dark glow in her eyes,
Panchita came steadily toward him through the strawberry vines. Dry Valley's
trembling hand released his whip handle. When within a yard of him Panchita
stretched out her arms.
"God, kid!" stammered Dry Valley, "do you mean--?"

But the seasons are versatile; and it may have been Springtime, after all,
instead of Indian Summer, that struck Dry Valley Johnson.

XVII
CHRISTMAS BY INJUNCTION
Cherokee was the civic father of Yellowhammer. Yellowhammer was a new
mining town constructed mainly of canvas and undressed pine. Cherokee was
a prospector. One day while his burro was eating quartz and pine burrs
Cherokee turned up with his pick a nugget, weighing thirty ounces. He staked
his claim and then, being a man of breadth and hospitality, sent out invitations
to his friends in three States to drop in and share his luck.
Not one of the invited guests sent regrets. They rolled in from the Gila
country, from Salt River, from the Pecos, from Albuquerque and Phoenix and
Santa Fe, and from the camps intervening.
When a thousand citizens had arrived and taken up claims they named the
town Yellowhammer, appointed a vigilance committee, and presented
Cherokee with a watch-chain made of nuggets.
Three hours after the presentation ceremonies Cherokee's claim played out. He
had located a pocket instead of a vein. He abandoned it and staked others one
by one. Luck had kissed her hand to him. Never afterward did he turn up
enough dust in Yellowhammer to pay his bar bill. But his thousand invited
guests were mostly prospering, and Cherokee smiled and congratulated them.
Yellowhammer was made up of men who took off their hats to a smiling loser;
so they invited Cherokee to say what he wanted.
"Me?" said Cherokee, "oh, grubstakes will be about the thing. I reckon I'll
prospect along up in the Mariposas. If I strike it up there I will most certainly
let you all know about the facts. I never was any hand to hold out cards on my
friends."
In May Cherokee packed his burro and turned its thoughtful, mouse- coloured
forehead to the north. Many citizens escorted him to the undefined limits of
Yellowhammer and bestowed upon him shouts of commendation and
farewells. Five pocket flasks without an air bubble between contents and cork
were forced upon him; and he was bidden to consider Yellowhammer in
perpetual commission for his bed, bacon and eggs, and hot water for shaving
in the event that luck did not see fit to warm her hands by his campfire in the
Mariposas.
The name of the father of Yellowhammer was given him by the gold hunters

in accordance with their popular system of nomenclature. It was not necessary
for a citizen to exhibit his baptismal certificate in order to acquire a cognomen.
A man's name was his personal property. For convenience in calling him up to
the bar and in designating him among other blue-shirted bipeds, a temporary
appellation, title, or epithet was conferred upon him by the public. Personal
peculiarities formed the source of the majority of such informal baptisms.
Many were easily dubbed geographically from the regions from which they
confessed to have hailed. Some announced themselves to be "Thompsons,"
and "Adamses," and the like, with a brazenness and loudness that cast a cloud
upon their titles. A few vaingloriously and shamelessly uncovered their proper
and indisputable names. This was held to be unduly arrogant, and did not win
popularity. One man who said he was Chesterton L. C. Belmont, and proved it
by letters, was given till sundown to leave the town. Such names as "Shorty,"
"Bow-legs," "Texas," "Lazy Bill," "Thirsty Rogers," "Limping Riley," "The
Judge," and "California Ed" were in favour. Cherokee derived his title from
the fact that he claimed to have lived for a time with that tribe in the Indian
Nation.
On the twentieth day of December Baldy, the mail rider, brought
Yellowhammer a piece of news.
"What do I see in Albuquerque," said Baldy, to the patrons of the bar, "but
Cherokee all embellished and festooned up like the Czar of Turkey, and
lavishin' money in bulk. Him and me seen the elephant and the owl, and we
had specimens of this seidlitz powder wine; and Cherokee he audits all the
bills, C.O.D. His pockets looked like a pool table's after a fifteen-ball run.
"Cherokee must have struck pay ore," remarked California Ed. "Well, he's
white. I'm much obliged to him for his success."
"Seems like Cherokee would ramble down to Yellowhammer and see his
friends," said another, slightly aggrieved. "But that's the way. Prosperity is the
finest cure there is for lost forgetfulness."
"You wait," said Baldy; "I'm comin' to that. Cherokee strikes a three- foot vein
up in the Mariposas that assays a trip to Europe to the ton, and he closes it out
to a syndicate outfit for a hundred thousand hasty dollars in cash. Then he
buys himself a baby sealskin overcoat and a red sleigh, and what do you think
he takes it in his head to do next?"
"Chuck-a-luck," said Texas, whose ideas of recreation were the gamester's.
"Come and Kiss Me, Ma Honey," sang Shorty, who carried tintypes in his
pocket and wore a red necktie while working on his claim.
"Bought a saloon?" suggested Thirsty Rogers.
"Cherokee took me to a room," continued Baldy, "and showed me. He's got

that room full of drums and dolls and skates and bags of candy and jumpingjacks and toy lambs and whistles and such infantile truck. And what do you
think he's goin' to do with them inefficacious knick- knacks? Don't surmise
none--Cherokee told me. He's goin' to lead 'em up in his red sleigh and--wait a
minute, don't order no drinks yet-- he's goin' to drive down here to
Yellowhammer and give the kids--the kids of this here town--the biggest
Christmas tree and the biggest cryin' doll and Little Giant Boys' Tool Chest
blowout that was ever seen west of the Cape Hatteras."
Two minutes of absolute silence ticked away in the wake of Baldy's words. It
was broken by the House, who, happily conceiving the moment to be ripe for
extending hospitality, sent a dozen whisky glasses spinning down the bar, with
the slower travelling bottle bringing up the rear.
"Didn't you tell him?" asked the miner called Trinidad.
"Well, no," answered Baldy, pensively; "I never exactly seen my way to.
"You see, Cherokee had this Christmas mess already bought and paid for; and
he was all flattered up with self-esteem over his idea; and we had in a way
flew the flume with that fizzy wine I speak of; so I never let on."
"I cannot refrain from a certain amount of surprise," said the Judge, as he hung
his ivory-handled cane on the bar, "that our friend Cherokee should possess
such an erroneous conception of--ah--his, as it were, own town."
"Oh, it ain't the eighth wonder of the terrestrial world," said Baldy.
"Cherokee's been gone from Yellowhammer over seven months. Lots of things
could happen in that time. How's he to know that there ain't a single kid in this
town, and so far as emigration is concerned, none expected?"
"Come to think of it," remarked California Ed, "it's funny some ain't drifted in.
Town ain't settled enough yet for to bring in the rubber- ring brigade, I
reckon."
"To top off this Christmas-tree splurge of Cherokee's," went on Baldy, "he's
goin' to give an imitation of Santa Claus. He's got a white wig and whiskers
that disfigure him up exactly like the pictures of this William Cullen
Longfellow in the books, and a red suit of fur-trimmed outside underwear, and
eight-ounce gloves, and a stand-up, lay-down croshayed red cap. Ain't it a
shame that a outfit like that can't get a chance to connect with a Annie and
Willie's prayer layout?"
"When does Cherokee allow to come over with his truck?" inquired Trinidad.
"Mornin' before Christmas," said Baldy. "And he wants you folks to have a
room fixed up and a tree hauled and ready. And such ladies to assist as can
stop breathin' long enough to let it be a surprise for the kids."
The unblessed condition of Yellowhammer had been truly described. The

voice of childhood had never gladdened its flimsy structures; the patter of
restless little feet had never consecrated the one rugged highway between the
two rows of tents and rough buildings. Later they would come. But now
Yellowhammer was but a mountain camp, and nowhere in it were the roguish,
expectant eyes, opening wide at dawn of the enchanting day; the eager, small
hands to reach for Santa's bewildering hoard; the elated, childish voicings of
the season's joy, such as the coming good things of the warm-hearted
Cherokee deserved.
Of women there were five in Yellowhammer. The assayer's wife, the
proprietress of the Lucky Strike Hotel, and a laundress whose washtub panned
out an ounce of dust a day. These were the permanent feminines; the
remaining two were the Spangler Sisters, Misses Fanchon and Erma, of the
Transcontinental Comedy Company, then playing in repertoire at the
(improvised) Empire Theatre. But of children there were none. Sometimes
Miss Fanchon enacted with spirit and address the part of robustious childhood;
but between her delineation and the visions of adolescence that the fancy
offered as eligible recipients of Cherokee's holiday stores there seemed to be
fixed a gulf.
Christmas would come on Thursday. On Tuesday morning Trinidad, instead of
going to work, sought the Judge at the Lucky Strike Hotel.
"It'll be a disgrace to Yellowhammer," said Trinidad, "if it throws Cherokee
down on his Christmas tree blowout. You might say that that man made this
town. For one, I'm goin' to see what can be done to give Santa Claus a square
deal."
"My co-operation," said the Judge, "would be gladly forthcoming. I am
indebted to Cherokee for past favours. But, I do not see--I have heretofore
regarded the absence of children rather as a luxury--but in this instance--still, I
do not see--"
"Look at me," said Trinidad, "and you'll see old Ways and Means with the fur
on. I'm goin' to hitch up a team and rustle a load of kids for Cherokee's Santa
Claus act, if I have to rob an orphan asylum."
"Eureka!" cried the Judge, enthusiastically.
"No, you didn't," said Trinidad, decidedly. "I found it myself. I learned about
that Latin word at school."
"I will accompany you," declared the Judge, waving his cane. "Perhaps such
eloquence and gift of language as I possess will be of benefit in persuading our
young friends to lend themselves to our project."
Within an hour Yellowhammer was acquainted with the scheme of Trinidad
and the Judge, and approved it. Citizens who knew of families with offspring

within a forty-mile radius of Yellowhammer came forward and contributed
their information. Trinidad made careful notes of all such, and then hastened
to secure a vehicle and team.
The first stop scheduled was at a double log-house fifteen miles out from
Yellowhammer. A man opened the door at Trinidad's hail, and then came down
and leaned upon the rickety gate. The doorway was filled with a close mass of
youngsters, some ragged, all full of curiosity and health.
"It's this way," explained Trinidad. "We're from Yellowhammer, and we come
kidnappin' in a gentle kind of a way. One of our leading citizens is stung with
the Santa Claus affliction, and he's due in town to-morrow with half the
folderols that's painted red and made in Germany. The youngest kid we got in
Yellowhammer packs a forty-five and a safety razor. Consequently we're
mighty shy on anybody to say 'Oh' and 'Ah' when we light the candles on the
Christmas tree. Now, partner, if you'll loan us a few kids we guarantee to
return 'em safe and sound on Christmas Day. And they'll come back loaded
down with a good time and Swiss Family Robinsons and cornucopias and red
drums and similar testimonials. What do you say?"
"In other words," said the Judge, "we have discovered for the first time in our
embryonic but progressive little city the inconveniences of the absence of
adolescence. The season of the year having approximately arrived during
which it is a custom to bestow frivolous but often appreciated gifts upon the
young and tender--"
"I understand," said the parent, packing his pipe with a forefinger. "I guess I
needn't detain you gentlemen. Me and the old woman have got seven kids, so
to speak; and, runnin' my mind over the bunch, I don't appear to hit upon none
that we could spare for you to take over to your doin's. The old woman has got
some popcorn candy and rag dolls hid in the clothes chest, and we allow to
give Christmas a little whirl of our own in a insignificant sort of style. No, I
couldn't, with any degree of avidity, seem to fall in with the idea of lettin' none
of 'em go. Thank you kindly, gentlemen."
Down the slope they drove and up another foothill to the ranch-house of Wiley
Wilson. Trinidad recited his appeal and the Judge boomed out his ponderous
antiphony. Mrs. Wiley gathered her two rosy-cheeked youngsters close to her
skirts and did not smile until she had seen Wiley laugh and shake his head.
Again a refusal.
Trinidad and the Judge vainly exhausted more than half their list before
twilight set in among the hills. They spent the night at a stage road hostelry,
and set out again early the next morning. The wagon had not acquired a single
passenger.
"It's creepin' upon my faculties," remarked Trinidad, "that borrowin' kids at

Christmas is somethin' like tryin' to steal butter from a man that's got hot
pancakes a-comin'."
"It is undoubtedly an indisputable fact," said the Judge, "that the-- ah--family
ties seem to be more coherent and assertive at that period of the year."
On the day before Christmas they drove thirty miles, making four fruitless
halts and appeals. Everywhere they found "kids" at a premium.
The sun was low when the wife of a section boss on a lonely railroad huddled
her unavailable progeny behind her and said:
"There's a woman that's just took charge of the railroad eatin' house down at
Granite Junction. I hear she's got a little boy. Maybe she might let him go."
Trinidad pulled up his mules at Granite Junction at five o'clock in the
afternoon. The train had just departed with its load of fed and appeased
passengers.
On the steps of the eating house they found a thin and glowering boy of ten
smoking a cigarette. The dining-room had been left in chaos by the peripatetic
appetites. A youngish woman reclined, exhausted, in a chair. Her face wore
sharp lines of worry. She had once possessed a certain style of beauty that
would never wholly leave her and would never wholly return. Trinidad set
forth his mission.
"I'd count it a mercy if you'd take Bobby for a while," she said, wearily. "I'm
on the go from morning till night, and I don't have time to 'tend to him. He's
learning bad habits from the men. It'll be the only chance he'll have to get any
Christmas."
The men went outside and conferred with Bobby. Trinidad pictured the glories
of the Christmas tree and presents in lively colours.
"And, moreover, my young friend," added the Judge, "Santa Claus himself
will personally distribute the offerings that will typify the gifts conveyed by
the shepherds of Bethlehem to--"
"Aw, come off," said the boy, squinting his small eyes. "I ain't no kid. There
ain't any Santa Claus. It's your folks that buys toys and sneaks 'em in when
you're asleep. And they make marks in the soot in the chimney with the tongs
to look like Santa's sleigh tracks."
"That might be so," argued Trinidad, "but Christmas trees ain't no fairy tale.
This one's goin' to look like the ten-cent store in Albuquerque, all strung up in
a redwood. There's tops and drums and Noah's arks and--"
"Oh, rats!" said Bobby, wearily. "I cut them out long ago. I'd like to have a
rifle--not a target one--a real one, to shoot wildcats with; but I guess you won't
have any of them on your old tree."

"Well, I can't say for sure," said Trinidad diplomatically; "it might be. You go
along with us and see."
The hope thus held out, though faint, won the boy's hesitating consent to go.
With this solitary beneficiary for Cherokee's holiday bounty, the canvassers
spun along the homeward road.
In Yellowhammer the empty storeroom had been transformed into what might
have passed as the bower of an Arizona fairy. The ladies had done their work
well. A tall Christmas tree, covered to the topmost branch with candles,
spangles, and toys sufficient for more than a score of children, stood in the
centre of the floor. Near sunset anxious eyes had begun to scan the street for
the returning team of the child-providers. At noon that day Cherokee had
dashed into town with his new sleigh piled high with bundles and boxes and
bales of all sizes and shapes. So intent was he upon the arrangements for his
altruistic plans that the dearth of children did not receive his notice. No one
gave away the humiliating state of Yellowhammer, for the efforts of Trinidad
and the Judge were expected to supply the deficiency.
When the sun went down Cherokee, with many wings and arch grins on his
seasoned face, went into retirement with the bundle containing the Santa Claus
raiment and a pack containing special and undisclosed gifts.
"When the kids are rounded up," he instructed the volunteer arrangement
committee, "light up the candles on the tree and set 'em to playin' 'Pussy Wants
a Corner' and 'King William.' When they get good and at it, why--old Santa'll
slide in the door. I reckon there'll be plenty of gifts to go 'round."
The ladies were flitting about the tree, giving it final touches that were never
final. The Spangled Sisters were there in costume as Lady Violet de Vere and
Marie, the maid, in their new drama, "The Miner's Bride." The theatre did not
open until nine, and they were welcome assistants of the Christmas tree
committee. Every minute heads would pop out the door to look and listen for
the approach of Trinidad's team. And now this became an anxious function,
for night had fallen and it would soon be necessary to light the candles on the
tree, and Cherokee was apt to make an irruption at any time in his Kriss
Kringle garb.
At length the wagon of the child "rustlers" rattled down the street to the door.
The ladies, with little screams of excitement, flew to the lighting of the
candles. The men of Yellowhammer passed in and out restlessly or stood about
the room in embarrassed groups.
Trinidad and the Judge, bearing the marks of protracted travel, entered,
conducting between them a single impish boy, who stared with sullen,
pessimistic eyes at the gaudy tree.
"Where are the other children?" asked the assayer's wife, the acknowledged

leader of all social functions.
"Ma'am," said Trinidad with a sigh, "prospectin' for kids at Christmas time is
like huntin' in a limestone for silver. This parental business is one that I haven't
no chance to comprehend. It seems that fathers and mothers are willin' for
their offsprings to be drownded, stole, fed on poison oak, and et by catamounts
364 days in the year; but on Christmas Day they insists on enjoyin' the
exclusive mortification of their company. This here young biped, ma'am, is all
that washes out of our two days' manoeuvres."
"Oh, the sweet little boy!" cooed Miss Erma, trailing her De Vere robes to
centre of stage.
"Aw, shut up," said Bobby, with a scowl. "Who's a kid? You ain't, you bet."
"Fresh brat!" breathed Miss Erma, beneath her enamelled smile.
"We done the best we could," said Trinidad. "It's tough on Cherokee, but it
can't be helped."
Then the door opened and Cherokee entered in the conventional dress of Saint
Nick. A white rippling beard and flowing hair covered his face almost to his
dark and shining eyes. Over his shoulder he carried a pack.
No one stirred as he came in. Even the Spangler Sisters ceased their coquettish
poses and stared curiously at the tall figure. Bobby stood with his hands in his
pockets gazing gloomily at the effeminate and childish tree. Cherokee put
down his pack and looked wonderingly about the room. Perhaps he fancied
that a bevy of eager children were being herded somewhere, to be loosed upon
his entrance. He went up to Bobby and extended his red-mittened hand.
"Merry Christmas, little boy," said Cherokee. "Anything on the tree you want
they'll get it down for you. Won't you shake hands with Santa Claus?"
"There ain't any Santa Claus," whined the boy. "You've got old false billy
goat's whiskers on your face. I ain't no kid. What do I want with dolls and tin
horses? The driver said you'd have a rifle, and you haven't. I want to go
home."
Trinidad stepped into the breach. He shook Cherokee's hand in warm greeting.
"I'm sorry, Cherokee," he explained. "There never was a kid in Yellowhammer.
We tried to rustle a bunch of 'em for your swaree, but this sardine was all we
could catch. He's a atheist, and he don't believe in Santa Claus. It's a shame for
you to be out all this truck. But me and the Judge was sure we could round up
a wagonful of candidates for your gimcracks."
"That's all right," said Cherokee gravely. "The expense don't amount to nothin'
worth mentionin'. We can dump the stuff down a shaft or throw it away. I don't
know what I was thinkin' about; but it never occurred to my cogitations that

there wasn't any kids in Yellowhammer."
Meanwhile the company had relaxed into a hollow but praiseworthy imitation
of a pleasure gathering.
Bobby had retreated to a distant chair, and was coldly regarding the scene with
ennui plastered thick upon him. Cherokee, lingering with his original idea,
went over and sat beside him.
"Where do you live, little boy?" he asked respectfully.
"Granite Junction," said Bobby without emphasis.
The room was warm. Cherokee took off his cap, and then removed his beard
and wig.
"Say!" exclaimed Bobby, with a show of interest, "I know your mug, all right."
"Did you ever see me before?" asked Cherokee.
"I don't know; but I've seen your picture lots of times."
"Where?"
The boy hesitated. "On the bureau at home," he answered.
"Let's have your name, if you please, buddy."
"Robert Lumsden. The picture belongs to my mother. She puts it under her
pillow of nights. And once I saw her kiss it. I wouldn't. But women are that
way."
Cherokee rose and beckoned to Trinidad.
"Keep this boy by you till I come back," he said. "I'm goin' to shed these
Christmas duds, and hitch up my sleigh. I'm goin' to take this kid home."
"Well, infidel," said Trinidad, taking Cherokee's vacant chair, "and so you are
too superannuated and effete to yearn for such mockeries as candy and toys, it
seems."
"I don't like you," said Bobby, with acrimony. "You said there would be a rifle.
A fellow can't even smoke. I wish I was at home."
Cherokee drove his sleigh to the door, and they lifted Bobby in beside him.
The team of fine horses sprang away prancingly over the hard snow. Cherokee
had on his $500 overcoat of baby sealskin. The laprobe that he drew about
them was as warm as velvet.
Bobby slipped a cigarette from his pocket and was trying to snap a match.
"Throw that cigarette away," said Cherokee, in a quiet but new voice.
Bobby hesitated, and then dropped the cylinder overboard.
"Throw the box, too," commanded the new voice.

More reluctantly the boy obeyed.
"Say," said Bobby, presently, "I like you. I don't know why. Nobody never
made me do anything I didn't want to do before."
"Tell me, kid," said Cherokee, not using his new voice, "are you sure your
mother kissed that picture that looks like me?"
"Dead sure. I seen her do it."
"Didn't you remark somethin' a while ago about wanting a rifle?"
"You bet I did. Will you get me one?"
"To-morrow--silver-mounted."
Cherokee took out his watch.
"Half-past nine. We'll hit the Junction plumb on time with Christmas Day. Are
you cold? Sit closer, son."

XVIII
A CHAPARRAL PRINCE
Nine o'clock at last, and the drudging toil of the day was ended. Lena climbed
to her room in the third half-story of the Quarrymen's Hotel. Since daylight
she had slaved, doing the work of a full-grown woman, scrubbing the floors,
washing the heavy ironstone plates and cups, making the beds, and supplying
the insatiate demands for wood and water in that turbulent and depressing
hostelry.
The din of the day's quarrying was over--the blasting and drilling, the creaking
of the great cranes, the shouts of the foremen, the backing and shifting of the
flat-cars hauling the heavy blocks of limestone. Down in the hotel office three
or four of the labourers were growling and swearing over a belated game of
checkers. Heavy odours of stewed meat, hot grease, and cheap coffee hung
like a depressing fog about the house.
Lena lit the stump of a candle and sat limply upon her wooden chair. She was
eleven years old, thin and ill-nourished. Her back and limbs were sore and
aching. But the ache in her heart made the biggest trouble. The last straw had
been added to the burden upon her small shoulders. They had taken away
Grimm. Always at night, however tired she might be, she had turned to Grimm
for comfort and hope. Each time had Grimm whispered to her that the prince
or the fairy would come and deliver her out of the wicked enchantment. Every
night she had taken fresh courage and strength from Grimm.
To whatever tale she read she found an analogy in her own condition. The

woodcutter's lost child, the unhappy goose girl, the persecuted stepdaughter,
the little maiden imprisoned in the witch's hut--all these were but transparent
disguises for Lena, the overworked kitchenmaid in the Quarrymen's Hotel.
And always when the extremity was direst came the good fairy or the gallant
prince to the rescue.
So, here in the ogre's castle, enslaved by a wicked spell, Lena had leaned upon
Grimm and waited, longing for the powers of goodness to prevail. But on the
day before Mrs. Maloney had found the book in her room and had carried it
away, declaring sharply that it would not do for servants to read at night; they
lost sleep and did not work briskly the next day. Can one only eleven years
old, living away from one's mamma, and never having any time to play, live
entirely deprived of Grimm? Just try it once and you will see what a difficult
thing it is.
Lena's home was in Texas, away up among the little mountains on the
Pedernales River, in a little town called Fredericksburg. They are all German
people who live in Fredericksburg. Of evenings they sit at little tables along
the sidewalk and drink beer and play pinochle and scat. They are very thrifty
people.
Thriftiest among them was Peter Hildesmuller, Lena's father. And that is why
Lena was sent to work in the hotel at the quarries, thirty miles away. She
earned three dollars every week there, and Peter added her wages to his wellguarded store. Peter had an ambition to become as rich as his neighbour, Hugo
Heffelbauer, who smoked a meerschaum pipe three feet long and had wiener
schnitzel and hassenpfeffer for dinner every day in the week. And now Lena
was quite old enough to work and assist in the accumulation of riches. But
conjecture, if you can, what it means to be sentenced at eleven years of age
from a home in the pleasant little Rhine village to hard labour in the ogre's
castle, where you must fly to serve the ogres, while they devour cattle and
sheep, growling fiercely as they stamp white limestone dust from their great
shoes for you to sweep and scour with your weak, aching fingers. And then--to
have Grimm taken away from you!
Lena raised the lid of an old empty case that had once contained canned corn
and got out a sheet of paper and a piece of pencil. She was going to write a
letter to her mamma. Tommy Ryan was going to post it for her at Ballinger's.
Tommy was seventeen, worked in the quarries, went home to Ballinger's every
night, and was now waiting in the shadows under Lena's window for her to
throw the letter out to him. That was the only way she could send a letter to
Fredericksburg. Mrs. Maloney did not like for her to write letters.
The stump of the candle was burning low, so Lena hastily bit the wood from
around the lead of her pencil and began. This is the letter she wrote:

Dearest Mamma:--I want so much to see you. And Gretel and Claus
and Heinrich and little Adolf. I am so tired. I want to see you.
To-day I was slapped by Mrs. Maloney and had no supper. I could
not bring in enough wood, for my hand hurt. She took my book
yesterday. I mean "Grimm's Fairy Tales," which Uncle Leo gave me.
It did not hurt any one for me to read the book. I try to work as
well as I can, but there is so much to do. I read only a little
bit every night. Dear mamma, I shall tell you what I am going to
do. Unless you send for me to-morrow to bring me home I shall go
to a deep place I know in the river and drown. It is wicked to
drown, I suppose, but I wanted to see you, and there is no one
else. I am very tired, and Tommy is waiting for the letter. You
will excuse me, mamma, if I do it.
Your respectful and loving daughter,
Lena.
Tommy was still waiting faithfully when the letter was concluded, and when
Lena dropped it out she saw him pick it up and start up the steep hillside.
Without undressing she blew out the candle and curled herself upon the
mattress on the floor.
At 10:30 o'clock old man Ballinger came out of his house in his stocking feet
and leaned over the gate, smoking his pipe. He looked down the big road,
white in the moonshine, and rubbed one ankle with the toe of his other foot. It
was time for the Fredericksburg mail to come pattering up the road.
Old man Ballinger had waited only a few minutes when he heard the lively
hoofbeats of Fritz's team of little black mules, and very soon afterward his
covered spring wagon stood in front of the gate. Fritz's big spectacles flashed
in the moonlight and his tremendous voice shouted a greeting to the
postmaster of Ballinger's. The mail-carrier jumped out and took the bridles
from the mules, for he always fed them oats at Ballinger's.
While the mules were eating from their feed bags old man Ballinger brought
out the mail sack and threw it into the wagon.
Fritz Bergmann was a man of three sentiments--or to be more accurate-- four,
the pair of mules deserving to be reckoned individually. Those mules were the
chief interest and joy of his existence. Next came the Emperor of Germany
and Lena Hildesmuller.

"Tell me," said Fritz, when he was ready to start, "contains the sack a letter to
Frau Hildesmuller from the little Lena at the quarries? One came in the last
mail to say that she is a little sick, already. Her mamma is very anxious to hear
again."
"Yes," said old man Ballinger, "thar's a letter for Mrs. Helterskelter, or some
sich name. Tommy Ryan brung it over when he come. Her little gal workin'
over thar, you say?"
"In the hotel," shouted Fritz, as he gathered up the lines; "eleven years old and
not bigger as a frankfurter. The close-fist of a Peter Hildesmuller!--some day I
shall with a big club pound that man's dummkopf--all in and out the town.
Perhaps in this letter Lena will say that she is yet feeling better. So, her
mamma will be glad. /Auf wiedersehen/, Herr Ballinger--your feets will take
cold out in the night air."
"So long, Fritzy," said old man Ballinger. "You got a nice cool night for your
drive."
Up the road went the little black mules at their steady trot, while Fritz
thundered at them occasional words of endearment and cheer.
These fancies occupied the mind of the mail-carrier until he reached the big
post oak forest, eight miles from Ballinger's. Here his ruminations were
scattered by the sudden flash and report of pistols and a whooping as if from a
whole tribe of Indians. A band of galloping centaurs closed in around the mail
wagon. One of them leaned over the front wheel, covered the driver with his
revolver, and ordered him to stop. Others caught at the bridles of Donder and
Blitzen.
"Donnerwetter!" shouted Fritz, with all his tremendous voice--"wass ist?
Release your hands from dose mules. Ve vas der United States mail!"
"Hurry up, Dutch!" drawled a melancholy voice. "Don't you know when
you're in a stick-up? Reverse your mules and climb out of the cart."
It is due to the breadth of Hondo Bill's demerit and the largeness of his
achievements to state that the holding up of the Fredericksburg mail was not
perpetrated by way of an exploit. As the lion while in the pursuit of prey
commensurate to his prowess might set a frivolous foot upon a casual rabbit in
his path, so Hondo Bill and his gang had swooped sportively upon the pacific
transport of Meinherr Fritz.
The real work of their sinister night ride was over. Fritz and his mail bag and
his mules came as gentle relaxation, grateful after the arduous duties of their
profession. Twenty miles to the southeast stood a train with a killed engine,
hysterical passengers and a looted express and mail car. That represented the
serious occupation of Hondo Bill and his gang. With a fairly rich prize of

currency and silver the robbers were making a wide detour to the west through
the less populous country, intending to seek safety in Mexico by means of
some fordable spot on the Rio Grande. The booty from the train had melted
the desperate bushrangers to jovial and happy skylarkers.
Trembling with outraged dignity and no little personal apprehension, Fritz
climbed out to the road after replacing his suddenly removed spectacles. The
band had dismounted and were singing, capering, and whooping, thus
expressing their satisfied delight in the life of a jolly outlaw. Rattlesnake
Rogers, who stood at the heads of the mules, jerked a little too vigorously at
the rein of the tender-mouthed Donder, who reared and emitted a loud,
protesting snort of pain. Instantly Fritz, with a scream of anger, flew at the
bulky Rogers and began to assiduously pummel that surprised freebooter with
his fists.
"Villain!" shouted Fritz, "dog, bigstiff! Dot mule he has a soreness by his
mouth. I vill knock off your shoulders mit your head-- robbermans!"
"Yi-yi!" howled Rattlesnake, roaring with laughter and ducking his head,
"somebody git this here sour-krout off'n me!"
One of the band yanked Fritz back by the coat-tail, and the woods rang with
Rattlesnake's vociferous comments.
"The dog-goned little wienerwurst," he yelled, amiably. "He's not so much of a
skunk, for a Dutchman. Took up for his animile plum quick, didn't he? I like to
see a man like his hoss, even if it is a mule. The dad-blamed little Limburger
he went for me, didn't he! Whoa, now, muley--I ain't a-goin' to hurt your
mouth agin any more."
Perhaps the mail would not have been tampered with had not Ben Moody, the
lieutenant, possessed certain wisdom that seemed to promise more spoils.
"Say, Cap," he said, addressing Hondo Bill, "there's likely to be good pickings
in these mail sacks. I've done some hoss tradin' with these Dutchmen around
Fredericksburg, and I know the style of the varmints. There's big money goes
through the mails to that town. Them Dutch risk a thousand dollars sent
wrapped in a piece of paper before they'd pay the banks to handle the money."
Hondo Bill, six feet two, gentle of voice and impulsive in action, was dragging
the sacks from the rear of the wagon before Moody had finished his speech. A
knife shone in his hand, and they heard the ripping sound as it bit through the
tough canvas. The outlaws crowded around and began tearing open letters and
packages, enlivening their labours by swearing affably at the writers, who
seemed to have conspired to confute the prediction of Ben Moody. Not a
dollar was found in the Fredericksburg mail.
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," said Hondo Bill to the mail- carrier in

solemn tones, "to be packing around such a lot of old, trashy paper as this.
What d'you mean by it, anyhow? Where do you Dutchers keep your money
at?"
The Ballinger mail sack opened like a cocoon under Hondo's knife. It
contained but a handful of mail. Fritz had been fuming with terror and
excitement until this sack was reached. He now remembered Lena's letter. He
addressed the leader of the band, asking that that particular missive be spared.
"Much obliged, Dutch," he said to the disturbed carrier. "I guess that's the
letter we want. Got spondulicks in it, ain't it? Here she is. Make a light, boys."
Hondo found and tore open the letter to Mrs. Hildesmuller. The others stood
about, lighting twisted up letters one from another. Hondo gazed with mute
disapproval at the single sheet of paper covered with the angular German
script.
"Whatever is this you've humbugged us with, Dutchy? You call this here a
valuable letter? That's a mighty low-down trick to play on your friends what
come along to help you distribute your mail."
"That's Chiny writin'," said Sandy Grundy, peering over Hondo's shoulder.
"You're off your kazip," declared another of the gang, an effective youth,
covered with silk handkerchiefs and nickel plating. "That's shorthand. I see
'em do it once in court."
"Ach, no, no, no--dot is German," said Fritz. "It is no more as a little girl
writing a letter to her mamma. One poor little girl, sick and vorking hard avay
from home. Ach! it is a shame. Good Mr. Robberman, you vill please let me
have dot letter?"
"What the devil do you take us for, old Pretzels?" said Hondo with sudden and
surprising severity. "You ain't presumin' to insinuate that we gents ain't
possessed of sufficient politeness for to take an interest in the miss's health, are
you? Now, you go on, and you read that scratchin' out loud and in plain United
States language to this here company of educated society."
Hondo twirled his six-shooter by its trigger guard and stood towering above
the little German, who at once began to read the letter, translating the simple
words into English. The gang of rovers stood in absolute silence, listening
intently.
"How old is that kid?" asked Hondo when the letter was done.
"Eleven," said Fritz.
"And where is she at?"
"At dose rock quarries--working. Ach, mein Gott--little Lena, she speak of
drowning. I do not know if she vill do it, but if she shall I schwear I vill dot

Peter Hildesmuller shoot mit a gun."
"You Dutchers," said Hondo Bill, his voice swelling with fine contempt,
"make me plenty tired. Hirin' out your kids to work when they ought to be
playin' dolls in the sand. You're a hell of a sect of people. I reckon we'll fix
your clock for a while just to show what we think of your old cheesy nation.
Here, boys!"
Hondo Bill parleyed aside briefly with his band, and then they seized Fritz and
conveyed him off the road to one side. Here they bound him fast to a tree with
a couple of lariats. His team they tied to another tree near by.
"We ain't going to hurt you bad," said Hondo reassuringly. "'Twon't hurt you to
be tied up for a while. We will now pass you the time of day, as it is up to us to
depart. Ausgespielt--nixcumrous, Dutchy. Don't get any more impatience."
Fritz heard a great squeaking of saddles as the men mounted their horses. Then
a loud yell and a great clatter of hoofs as they galloped pell-mell back along
the Fredericksburg road.
For more than two hours Fritz sat against his tree, tightly but not painfully
bound. Then from the reaction after his exciting adventure he sank into
slumber. How long he slept he knew not, but he was at last awakened by a
rough shake. Hands were untying his ropes. He was lifted to his feet, dazed,
confused in mind, and weary of body. Rubbing his eyes, he looked and saw
that he was again in the midst of the same band of terrible bandits. They
shoved him up to the seat of his wagon and placed the lines in his hands.
"Hit it out for home, Dutch," said Hondo Bill's voice commandingly. "You've
given us lots of trouble and we're pleased to see the back of your neck. Spiel!
Zwei bier! Vamoose!"
Hondo reached out and gave Blitzen a smart cut with his quirt.
The little mules sprang ahead, glad to be moving again. Fritz urged them
along, himself dizzy and muddled over his fearful adventure.
According to schedule time, he should have reached Fredericksburg at
daylight. As it was, he drove down the long street of the town at eleven o'clock
A.M. He had to pass Peter Hildesmuller's house on his way to the post-office.
He stopped his team at the gate and called. But Frau Hildesmuller was
watching for him. Out rushed the whole family of Hildesmullers.
Frau Hildesmuller, fat and flushed, inquired if he had a letter from Lena, and
then Fritz raised his voice and told the tale of his adventure. He told the
contents of that letter that the robber had made him read, and then Frau
Hildesmuller broke into wild weeping. Her little Lena drown herself! Why had
they sent her from home? What could be done? Perhaps it would be too late by
the time they could send for her now. Peter Hildesmuller dropped his

meerschaum on the walk and it shivered into pieces.
"Woman!" he roared at his wife, "why did you let that child go away? It is
your fault if she comes home to us no more."
Every one knew that it was Peter Hildesmuller's fault, so they paid no
attention to his words.
A moment afterward a strange, faint voice was heard to call: "Mamma!" Frau
Hildesmuller at first thought it was Lena's spirit calling, and then she rushed to
the rear of Fritz's covered wagon, and, with a loud shriek of joy, caught up
Lena herself, covering her pale little face with kisses and smothering her with
hugs. Lena's eyes were heavy with the deep slumber of exhaustion, but she
smiled and lay close to the one she had longed to see. There among the mail
sacks, covered in a nest of strange blankets and comforters, she had lain asleep
until wakened by the voices around her.
Fritz stared at her with eyes that bulged behind his spectacles.
"Gott in Himmel!" he shouted. "How did you get in that wagon? Am I going
crazy as well as to be murdered and hanged by robbers this day?"
"You brought her to us, Fritz," cried Frau Hildesmuller. "How can we ever
thank you enough?"
"Tell mamma how you came in Fritz's wagon," said Frau Hildesmuller.
"I don't know," said Lena. "But I know how I got away from the hotel. The
Prince brought me."
"By the Emperor's crown!" shouted Fritz, "we are all going crazy."
"I always knew he would come," said Lena, sitting down on her bundle of
bedclothes on the sidewalk. "Last night he came with his armed knights and
captured the ogre's castle. They broke the dishes and kicked down the doors.
They pitched Mr. Maloney into a barrel of rain water and threw flour all over
Mrs. Maloney. The workmen in the hotel jumped out of the windows and ran
into the woods when the knights began firing their guns. They wakened me up
and I peeped down the stair. And then the Prince came up and wrapped me in
the bedclothes and carried me out. He was so tall and strong and fine. His face
was as rough as a scrubbing brush, and he talked soft and kind and smelled of
schnapps. He took me on his horse before him and we rode away among the
knights. He held me close and I went to sleep that way, and didn't wake up till
I got home."
"Rubbish!" cried Fritz Bergmann. "Fairy tales! How did you come from the
quarries to my wagon?"
"The Prince brought me," said Lena, confidently.
And to this day the good people of Fredericksburg haven't been able to make

her give any other explanation.

XIX
THE REFORMATION OF CALLIOPE
Calliope Catesby was in his humours again. Ennui was upon him. This goodly
promontory, the earth--particularly that portion of it known as Quicksand--was
to him no more than a pestilent congregation of vapours. Overtaken by the
megrims, the philosopher may seek relief in soliloquy; my lady find solace in
tears; the flaccid Easterner scold at the millinery bills of his women folk. Such
recourse was insufficient to the denizens of Quicksand. Calliope, especially,
was wont to express his ennui according to his lights.
Over night Calliope had hung out signals of approaching low spirits. He had
kicked his own dog on the porch of the Occidental Hotel, and refused to
apologise. He had become capricious and fault-finding in conversation. While
strolling about he reached often for twigs of mesquite and chewed the leaves
fiercely. That was always an ominous act. Another symptom alarming to those
who were familiar with the different stages of his doldrums was his increasing
politeness and a tendency to use formal phrases. A husky softness succeeded
the usual penetrating drawl in his tones. A dangerous courtesy marked his
manners. Later, his smile became crooked, the left side of his mouth slanting
upward, and Quicksand got ready to stand from under.
At this stage Calliope generally began to drink. Finally, about midnight, he
was seen going homeward, saluting those whom he met with exaggerated but
inoffensive courtesy. Not yet was Calliope's melancholy at the danger point.
He would seat himself at the window of the room he occupied over Silvester's
tonsorial parlours and there chant lugubrious and tuneless ballads until
morning, accompanying the noises by appropriate maltreatment of a jangling
guitar. More magnanimous than Nero, he would thus give musical warning of
the forthcoming municipal upheaval that Quicksand was scheduled to endure.
A quiet, amiable man was Calliope Catesby at other times--quiet to indolence,
and amiable to worthlessness. At best he was a loafer and a nuisance; at worst
he was the Terror of Quicksand. His ostensible occupation was something
subordinate in the real estate line; he drove the beguiled Easterner in
buckboards out to look over lots and ranch property. Originally he came from
one of the Gulf States, his lank six feet, slurring rhythm of speech, and
sectional idioms giving evidence of his birthplace.
And yet, after taking on Western adjustments, this languid pine-box whittler,
cracker barrel hugger, shady corner lounger of the cotton fields and sumac

hills of the South became famed as a bad man among men who had made a
life-long study of the art of truculence.
At nine the next morning Calliope was fit. Inspired by his own barbarous
melodies and the contents of his jug, he was ready primed to gather fresh
laurels from the diffident brow of Quicksand. Encircled and criss-crossed with
cartridge belts, abundantly garnished with revolvers, and copiously drunk, he
poured forth into Quicksand's main street. Too chivalrous to surprise and
capture a town by silent sortie, he paused at the nearest corner and emitted his
slogan--that fearful, brassy yell, so reminiscent of the steam piano, that had
gained for him the classic appellation that had superseded his own baptismal
name. Following close upon his vociferation came three shots from his fortyfive by way of limbering up the guns and testing his aim. A yellow dog, the
personal property of Colonel Swazey, the proprietor of the Occidental, fell feet
upward in the dust with one farewell yelp. A Mexican who was crossing the
street from the Blue Front grocery carrying in his hand a bottle of kerosene,
was stimulated to a sudden and admirable burst of speed, still grasping the
neck of the shattered bottle. The new gilt weather-cock on Judge Riley's lemon
and ultramarine two-story residence shivered, flapped, and hung by a splinter,
the sport of the wanton breezes.
The artillery was in trim. Calliope's hand was steady. The high, calm ecstasy
of habitual battle was upon him, though slightly embittered by the sadness of
Alexander in that his conquests were limited to the small world of Quicksand.
Down the street went Calliope, shooting right and left. Glass fell like hail;
dogs vamosed; chickens flew, squawking; feminine voices shrieked
concernedly to youngsters at large. The din was perforated at intervals by the
/staccato/ of the Terror's guns, and was drowned periodically by the brazen
screech that Quicksand knew so well. The occasions of Calliope's low spirits
were legal holidays in Quicksand. All along the main street in advance of his
coming clerks were putting up shutters and closing doors. Business would
languish for a space. The right of way was Calliope's, and as he advanced,
observing the dearth of opposition and the few opportunities for distraction,
his ennui perceptibly increased.
But some four squares farther down lively preparations were being made to
minister to Mr. Catesby's love for interchange of compliments and repartee.
On the previous night numerous messengers had hastened to advise Buck
Patterson, the city marshal, of Calliope's impending eruption. The patience of
that official, often strained in extending leniency toward the disturber's
misdeeds, had been overtaxed. In Quicksand some indulgence was accorded
the natural ebullition of human nature. Providing that the lives of the more
useful citizens were not recklessly squandered, or too much property
needlessly laid waste, the community sentiment was against a too strict

enforcement of the law. But Calliope had raised the limit. His outbursts had
been too frequent and too violent to come within the classification of a normal
and sanitary relaxation of spirit.
Buck Patterson had been expecting and awaiting in his little ten-by- twelve
frame office that preliminary yell announcing that Calliope was feeling blue.
When the signal came the city marshal rose to his feet and buckled on his
guns. Two deputy sheriffs and three citizens who had proven the edible
qualities of fire also stood up, ready to bandy with Calliope's leaden
jocularities.
"Gather that fellow in," said Buck Patterson, setting forth the lines of the
campaign. "Don't have no talk, but shoot as soon as you can get a show. Keep
behind cover and bring him down. He's a nogood 'un. It's up to Calliope to
turn up his toes this time, I reckon. Go to him all spraddled out, boys. And
don't git too reckless, for what Calliope shoots at he hits."
Buck Patterson, tall, muscular, and solemn-faced, with his bright "City
Marshal" badge shining on the breast of his blue flannel shirt, gave his posse
directions for the onslaught upon Calliope. The plan was to accomplish the
downfall of the Quicksand Terror without loss to the attacking party, if
possible.
The splenetic Calliope, unconscious of retributive plots, was steaming down
the channel, cannonading on either side, when he suddenly became aware of
breakers ahead. The city marshal and one of the deputies rose up behind some
dry-goods boxes half a square to the front and opened fire. At the same time
the rest of the posse, divided, shelled him from two side streets up which they
were cautiously manoeuvring from a well-executed detour.
The first volley broke the lock of one of Calliope's guns, cut a neat underbit in
his right ear, and exploded a cartridge in his crossbelt, scorching his ribs as it
burst. Feeling braced up by this unexpected tonic to his spiritual depression,
Calliope executed a fortissimo note from his upper register, and returned the
fire like an echo. The upholders of the law dodged at his flash, but a trifle too
late to save one of the deputies a bullet just above the elbow, and the marshal a
bleeding cheek from a splinter that a ball tore from the box he had ducked
behind.
And now Calliope met the enemy's tactics in kind. Choosing with a rapid eye
the street from which the weakest and least accurate fire had come, he invaded
it at a double-quick, abandoning the unprotected middle of the street. With
rare cunning the opposing force in that direction--one of the deputies and two
of the valorous volunteers-- waited, concealed by beer barrels, until Calliope
had passed their retreat, and then peppered him from the rear. In another
moment they were reinforced by the marshal and his other men, and then

Calliope felt that in order to successfully prolong the delights of the
controversy he must find some means of reducing the great odds against him.
His eye fell upon a structure that seemed to hold out this promise, providing
he could reach it.
Not far away was the little railroad station, its building a strong box house, ten
by twenty feet, resting upon a platform four feet above ground. Windows were
in each of its walls. Something like a fort it might become to a man thus sorely
pressed by superior numbers.
Calliope made a bold and rapid spurt for it, the marshal's crowd "smoking"
him as he ran. He reached the haven in safety, the station agent leaving the
building by a window, like a flying squirrel, as the garrison entered the door.
Patterson and his supporters halted under protection of a pile of lumber and
held consultations. In the station was an unterrified desperado who was an
excellent shot and carried an abundance of ammunition. For thirty yards on
either side of the besieged was a stretch of bare, open ground. It was a sure
thing that the man who attempted to enter that unprotected area would be
stopped by one of Calliope's bullets.
The city marshal was resolved. He had decided that Calliope Catesby should
no more wake the echoes of Quicksand with his strident whoop. He had so
announced. Officially and personally he felt imperatively bound to put the soft
pedal on that instrument of discord. It played bad tunes.
Standing near was a hand truck used in the manipulation of small freight. It
stood by a shed full of sacked wool, a consignment from one of the sheep
ranches. On this truck the marshal and his men piled three heavy sacks of
wool. Stooping low, Buck Patterson started for Calliope's fort, slowly pushing
this loaded truck before him for protection. The posse, scattering broadly,
stood ready to nip the besieged in case he should show himself in an effort to
repel the juggernaut of justice that was creeping upon him. Only once did
Calliope make demonstration. He fired from a window, and some tufts of wool
spurted from the marshal's trustworthy bulwark. The return shots from the
posse pattered against the window frame of the fort. No loss resulted on either
side.
The marshal was too deeply engrossed in steering his protected battleship to
be aware of the approach of the morning train until he was within a few feet of
the platform. The train was coming up on the other side of it. It stopped only
one minute at Quicksand. What an opportunity it would offer to Calliope! He
had only to step out the other door, mount the train, and away.
Abandoning his breastwork, Buck, with his gun ready, dashed up the steps and
into the room, driving upon the closed door with one heave of his weighty
shoulder. The members of the posse heard one shot fired inside, and then there

was silence.
At length the wounded man opened his eyes. After a blank space he again
could see and hear and feel and think. Turning his eyes about, he found
himself lying on a wooden bench. A tall man with a perplexed countenance,
wearing a big badge with "City Marshal" engraved upon it, stood over him. A
little old woman in black, with a wrinkled face and sparkling black eyes, was
holding a wet handkerchief against one of his temples. He was trying to get
these facts fixed in his mind and connected with past events, when the old
woman began to talk.
"There now, great, big, strong man! That bullet never tetched ye! Jest skeeted
along the side of your head and sort of paralysed ye for a spell. I've heerd of
sech things afore; cun-cussion is what they names it. Abel Wadkins used to
kill squirrels that way--barkin' 'em, Abe called it. You jest been barked, sir,
and you'll be all right in a little bit. Feel lots better already, don't ye! You just
lay still a while longer and let me bathe your head. You don't know me, I
reckon, and 'tain't surprisin' that you shouldn't. I come in on that train from
Alabama to see my son. Big son, ain't he? Lands! you wouldn't hardly think
he'd ever been a baby, would ye? This is my son, sir."
Half turning, the old woman looked up at the standing man, her worn face
lighting with a proud and wonderful smile. She reached out one veined and
calloused hand and took one of her son's. Then smiling cheerily down at the
prostrate man, she continued to dip the handkerchief, in the waiting-room tin
washbasin and gently apply it to his temple. She had the benevolent garrulity
of old age.
"I ain't seen my son before," she continued, "in eight years. One of my
nephews, Elkanah Price, he's a conductor on one of them railroads and he got
me a pass to come out here. I can stay a whole week on it, and then it'll take
me back again. Jest think, now, that little boy of mine has got to be a officer--a
city marshal of a whole town! That's somethin' like a constable, ain't it? I
never knowed he was a officer; he didn't say nothin' about it in his letters. I
reckon he thought his old mother'd be skeered about the danger he was in. But,
laws! I never was much of a hand to git skeered. 'Tain't no use. I heard them
guns a-shootin' while I was gettin' off them cars, and I see smoke a-comin' out
of the depot, but I jest walked right along. Then I see son's face lookin' out
through the window. I knowed him at oncet. He met me at the door, and
squeezes me 'most to death. And there you was, sir, a-lyin' there jest like you
was dead, and I 'lowed we'd see what might be done to help sot you up."
"I think I'll sit up now," said the concussion patient. "I'm feeling pretty fair by
this time."
He sat, somewhat weakly yet, leaning against the wall. He was a rugged man,

big-boned and straight. His eyes, steady and keen, seemed to linger upon the
face of the man standing so still above him. His look wandered often from the
face he studied to the marshal's badge upon the other's breast.
"Yes, yes, you'll be all right," said the old woman, patting his arm, "if you
don't get to cuttin' up agin, and havin' folks shooting at you. Son told me about
you, sir, while you was layin' senseless on the floor. Don't you take it as
meddlesome fer an old woman with a son as big as you to talk about it. And
you mustn't hold no grudge ag'in' my son for havin' to shoot at ye. A officer
has got to take up for the law--it's his duty--and them that acts bad and lives
wrong has to suffer. Don't blame my son any, sir--'tain't his fault. He's always
been a good boy--good when he was growin' up, and kind and 'bedient and
well-behaved. Won't you let me advise you, sir, not to do so no more? Be a
good man, and leave liquor alone and live peaceably and goodly. Keep away
from bad company and work honest and sleep sweet."
The black-mitted hand of the old pleader gently touched the breast of the man
she addressed. Very earnest and candid her old, worn face looked. In her rusty
black dress and antique bonnet she sat, near the close of a long life, and
epitomised the experience of the world. Still the man to whom she spoke
gazed above her head, contemplating the silent son of the old mother.
"What does the marshal say?" he asked. "Does he believe the advice is good?
Suppose the marshal speaks up and says if the talk's all right?"
The tall man moved uneasily. He fingered the badge on his breast for a
moment, and then he put an arm around the old woman and drew her close to
him. She smiled the unchanging mother smile of three-score years, and patted
his big brown hand with her crooked, mittened fingers while her son spake.
"I says this," he said, looking squarely into the eyes of the other man, "that if I
was in your place I'd follow it. If I was a drunken, desp'rate character, without
shame or hope, I'd follow it. If I was in your place and you was in mine I'd
say: 'Marshal, I'm willin' to swear if you'll give me the chance I'll quit the
racket. I'll drop the tanglefoot and the gun play, and won't play hoss no more.
I'll be a good citizen and go to work and quit my foolishness. So help me
God!' That's what I'd say to you if you was marshal and I was in your place."
"Hear my son talkin'," said the old woman softly. "Hear him, sir. You promise
to be good and he won't do you no harm. Forty-one year ago his heart first
beat ag'in' mine, and it's beat true ever since."
The other man rose to his feet, trying his limbs and stretching his muscles.
"Then," said he, "if you was in my place and said that, and I was marshal, I'd
say: 'Go free, and do your best to keep your promise.'"
"Lawsy!" exclaimed the old woman, in a sudden flutter, "ef I didn't clear

forget that trunk of mine! I see a man settin' it on the platform jest as I seen
son's face in the window, and it went plum out of my head. There's eight jars
of home-made quince jam in that trunk that I made myself. I wouldn't have
nothin' happen to them jars for a red apple."
Away to the door she trotted, spry and anxious, and then Calliope Catesby
spoke out to Buck Patterson:
"I just couldn't help it, Buck. I seen her through the window a-comin' in. She
never had heard a word 'bout my tough ways. I didn't have the nerve to let her
know I was a worthless cuss bein' hunted down by the community. There you
was lyin' where my shot laid you, like you was dead. The idea struck me
sudden, and I just took your badge off and fastened it onto myself, and I
fastened my reputation onto you. I told her I was the marshal and you was a
holy terror. You can take your badge back now, Buck."
With shaking fingers Calliope began to unfasten the disc of metal from his
shirt.
"Easy there!" said Buck Patterson. "You keep that badge right where it is,
Calliope Catesby. Don't you dare to take it off till the day your mother leaves
this town. You'll be city marshal of Quicksand as long as she's here to know it.
After I stir around town a bit and put 'em on I'll guarantee that nobody won't
give the thing away to her. And say, you leather-headed, rip-roarin', low-down
son of a locoed cyclone, you follow that advice she give me! I'm goin' to take
some of it myself, too."
"Buck," said Calliope feelingly, "ef I don't I hope I may--"
"Shut up," said Buck. "She's a-comin' back."
Whirligigs
By
O. Henry

Whirligigs
I
THE WORLD AND THE DOOR
A favourite dodge to get your story read by the public is to assert that it is true,
and then add that Truth is stranger than Fiction. I do not know if the yarn I am
anxious for you to read is true; but the Spanish purser of the fruit steamer El
Carrero swore to me by the shrine of Santa Guadalupe that he had the facts
from the U. S. vice-consul at La Paz—a person who could not possibly have
been cognizant of half of them.
As for the adage quoted above, I take pleasure in puncturing it by affirming
that I read in a purely fictional story the other day the line: "'Be it so,' said the
policeman." Nothing so strange has yet cropped out in Truth.
When H. Ferguson Hedges, millionaire promoter, investor and man-aboutNew-York, turned his thoughts upon matters convivial, and word of it went
"down the line," bouncers took a precautionary turn at the Indian clubs,
waiters put ironstone china on his favourite tables, cab drivers crowded close
to the curbstone in front of all-night cafés, and careful cashiers in his regular

haunts charged up a few bottles to his account by way of preface and
introduction.
As a money power a one-millionaire is of small account in a city where the
man who cuts your slice of beef behind the free-lunch counter rides to work in
his own automobile. But Hedges spent his money as lavishly, loudly and
showily as though he were only a clerk squandering a week's wages. And,
after all, the bartender takes no interest in your reserve fund. He would rather
look you up on his cash register than in Bradstreet.
On the evening that the material allegation of facts begins, Hedges was
bidding dull care begone in the company of five or six good fellows—
acquaintances and friends who had gathered in his wake.
Among them were two younger men—Ralph Merriam, a broker, and Wade,
his friend.
Two deep-sea cabmen were chartered. At Columbus Circle they hove to long
enough to revile the statue of the great navigator, unpatriotically rebuking him
for having voyaged in search of land instead of liquids. Midnight overtook the
party marooned in the rear of a cheap café far uptown.
Hedges was arrogant, overriding and quarrelsome. He was burly and tough,
iron-gray but vigorous, "good" for the rest of the night. There was a dispute—
about nothing that matters—and the five-fingered words were passed—the
words that represent the glove cast into the lists. Merriam played the rôle of
the verbal Hotspur.
Hedges rose quickly, seized his chair, swung it once and smashed wildly down
at Merriam's head. Merriam dodged, drew a small revolver and shot Hedges in
the chest. The leading roysterer stumbled, fell in a wry heap, and lay still.
Wade, a commuter, had formed that habit of promptness. He juggled Merriam
out a side door, walked him to the corner, ran him a block and caught a
hansom. They rode five minutes and then got out on a dark corner and
dismissed the cab. Across the street the lights of a small saloon betrayed its
hectic hospitality.
"Go in the back room of that saloon," said Wade, "and wait. I'll go find out
what's doing and let you know. You may take two drinks while I am gone—no
more."
At ten minutes to one o'clock Wade returned. "Brace up, old chap," he said.
"The ambulance got there just as I did. The doctor says he's dead. You may
have one more drink. You let me run this thing for you. You've got to skip. I
don't believe a chair is legally a deadly weapon. You've got to make tracks,
that's all there is to it."
Merriam complained of the cold querulously, and asked for another drink.

"Did you notice what big veins he had on the back of his hands?" he said. "I
never could stand—I never could—"
"Take one more," said Wade, "and then come on. I'll see you through."
Wade kept his promise so well that at eleven o'clock the next morning
Merriam, with a new suit case full of new clothes and hair-brushes, stepped
quietly on board a little 500-ton fruit steamer at an East River pier. The vessel
had brought the season's first cargo of limes from Port Limon, and was
homeward bound. Merriam had his bank balance of $2,800 in his pocket in
large bills, and brief instructions to pile up as much water as he could between
himself and New York. There was no time for anything more.
From Port Limon Merriam worked down the coast by schooner and sloop to
Colon, thence across the isthmus to Panama, where he caught a tramp bound
for Callao and such intermediate ports as might tempt the discursive skipper
from his course.
It was at La Paz that Merriam decided to land—La Paz the Beautiful, a little
harbourless town smothered in a living green ribbon that banded the foot of a
cloud-piercing mountain. Here the little steamer stopped to tread water while
the captain's dory took him ashore that he might feel the pulse of the cocoanut
market. Merriam went too, with his suit case, and remained.
Kalb, the vice-consul, a Græco-Armenian citizen of the United States, born in
Hessen-Darmstadt, and educated in Cincinnati ward primaries, considered all
Americans his brothers and bankers. He attached himself to Merriam's elbow,
introduced him to every one in La Paz who wore shoes, borrowed ten dollars
and went back to his hammock.
There was a little wooden hotel in the edge of a banana grove, facing the sea,
that catered to the tastes of the few foreigners that had dropped out of the
world into the triste Peruvian town. At Kalb's introductory: "Shake hands with
––––," he had obediently exchanged manual salutations with a German doctor,
one French and two Italian merchants, and three or four Americans who were
spoken of as gold men, rubber men, mahogany men—anything but men of
living tissue.
After dinner Merriam sat in a corner of the broad front galeria with Bibb, a
Vermonter interested in hydraulic mining, and smoked and drank Scotch
"smoke." The moonlit sea, spreading infinitely before him, seemed to separate
him beyond all apprehension from his old life. The horrid tragedy in which he
had played such a disastrous part now began, for the first time since he stole
on board the fruiter, a wretched fugitive, to lose its sharper outlines. Distance
lent assuagement to his view. Bibb had opened the flood-gates of a stream of
long-dammed discourse, overjoyed to have captured an audience that had not
suffered under a hundred repetitions of his views and theories.

"One year more," said Bibb, "and I'll go back to God's country. Oh, I know it's
pretty here, and you get dolce far niente handed to you in chunks, but this
country wasn't made for a white man to live in. You've got to have to plug
through snow now and then, and see a game of baseball and wear a stiff collar
and have a policeman cuss you. Still, La Paz is a good sort of a pipe-dreamy
old hole. And Mrs. Conant is here. When any of us feels particularly like
jumping into the sea we rush around to her house and propose. It's nicer to be
rejected by Mrs. Conant than it is to be drowned. And they say drowning is a
delightful sensation."
"Many like her here?" asked Merriam.
"Not anywhere," said Bibb, with a comfortable sigh. She's the only white
woman in La Paz. The rest range from a dappled dun to the colour of a b-flat
piano key. She's been here a year. Comes from—well, you know how a
woman can talk—ask 'em to say 'string' and they'll say 'crow's foot' or 'cat's
cradle.' Sometimes you'd think she was from Oshkosh, and again from
Jacksonville, Florida, and the next day from Cape Cod."
"Mystery?" ventured Merriam.
"M—well, she looks it; but her talk's translucent enough. But that's a woman. I
suppose if the Sphinx were to begin talking she'd merely say: 'Goodness me!
more visitors coming for dinner, and nothing to eat but the sand which is here.'
But you won't think about that when you meet her, Merriam. You'll propose to
her too."
To make a hard story soft, Merriam did meet her and propose to her. He found
her to be a woman in black with hair the colour of a bronze turkey's wings,
and mysterious, remembering eyes that—well, that looked as if she might
have been a trained nurse looking on when Eve was created. Her words and
manner, though, were translucent, as Bibb had said. She spoke, vaguely, of
friends in California and some of the lower parishes in Louisiana. The tropical
climate and indolent life suited her; she had thought of buying an orange grove
later on; La Paz, all in all, charmed her.
Merriam's courtship of the Sphinx lasted three months, although be did not
know that he was courting her. He was using her as an antidote for remorse,
until he found, too late, that he had acquired the habit. During that time he had
received no news from home. Wade did not know where he was; and he was
not sure of Wade's exact address, and was afraid to write. He thought he had
better let matters rest as they were for a while.
One afternoon he and Mrs. Conant hired two ponies and rode out along the
mountain trail as far as the little cold river that came tumbling down the
foothills. There they stopped for a drink, and Merriam spoke his piece—he
proposed, as Bibb had prophesied.

Mrs. Conant gave him one glance of brilliant tenderness, and then her face
took on such a strange, haggard look that Merriam was shaken out of his
intoxication and back to his senses.
"I beg your pardon, Florence," he said, releasing her hand; "but I'll have to
hedge on part of what I said. I can't ask you to marry me, of course. I killed a
man in New York—a man who was my friend—shot him down—in quite a
cowardly manner, I understand. Of course, the drinking didn't excuse it. Well,
I couldn't resist having my say; and I'll always mean it. I'm here as a fugitive
from justice, and—I suppose that ends our acquaintance."
Mrs. Conant plucked little leaves assiduously from the low-hanging branch of
a lime tree.
"I suppose so," she said, in low and oddly uneven tones; "but that depends
upon you. I'll be as honest as you were. I poisoned my husband. I am a selfmade widow. A man cannot love a murderess. So I suppose that ends our
acquaintance."
She looked up at him slowly. His face turned a little pale, and he stared at her
blankly, like a deaf-and-dumb man who was wondering what it was all about.
She took a swift step toward him, with stiffened arms and eyes blazing.
"Don't look at me like that!" she cried, as though she were in acute pain.
"Curse me, or turn your back on me, but don't look that way. Am I a woman to
be beaten? If I could show you—here on my arms, and on my back are scars—
and it has been more than a year—scars that he made in his brutal rages. A
holy nun would have risen and struck the fiend down. Yes, I killed him. The
foul and horrible words that he hurled at me that last day are repeated in my
ears every night when I sleep. And then came his blows, and the end of my
endurance. I got the poison that afternoon. It was his custom to drink every
night in the library before going to bed a hot punch made of rum and wine.
Only from my fair hands would he receive it— because he knew the fumes of
spirits always sickened me. That night when the maid brought it to me I sent
her downstairs on an errand. Before taking him his drink I went to my little
private cabinet and poured into it more than a tea-spoonful of tincture of
aconite—enough to kill three men, so I had learned. I had drawn $6,000 that I
had in bank, and with that and a few things in a satchel I left the house without
any one seeing me. As I passed the library I heard him stagger up and fall
heavily on a couch. I took a night train for New Orleans, and from there I
sailed to the Bermudas. I finally cast anchor in La Paz. And now what have
you to say? Can you open your mouth?"
Merriam came back to life.
"Florence," he said earnestly, "I want you. I don't care what you've done. If the
world—"

"Ralph," she interrupted, almost with a scream, "be my world!"
Her eyes melted; she relaxed magnificently and swayed toward Merriam so
suddenly that he had to jump to catch her.
Dear me! in such scenes how the talk runs into artificial prose. But it can't be
helped. It's the subconscious smell of the footlights' smoke that's in all of us.
Stir the depths of your cook's soul sufficiently and she will discourse in
Bulwer-Lyttonese.
Merriam and Mrs. Conant were very happy. He announced their engagement
at the Hotel Orilla del Mar. Eight foreigners and four native Astors pounded
his back and shouted insincere congratulations at him. Pedrito, the Castilianmannered barkeep, was goaded to extra duty until his agility would have
turned a Boston cherry-phosphate clerk a pale lilac with envy.
They were both very happy. According to the strange mathematics of the god
of mutual affinity, the shadows that clouded their pasts when united became
only half as dense instead of darker. They shut the world out and bolted the
doors. Each was the other's world. Mrs. Conant lived again. The remembering
look left her eyes. Merriam was with her every moment that was possible. On
a little plateau under a grove of palms and calabash trees they were going to
build a fairy bungalow. They were to be married in two months. Many hours
of the day they had their heads together over the house plans. Their joint
capital would set up a business in fruit or woods that would yield a
comfortable support. "Good night, my world," would say Mrs. Conant every
evening when Merriam left her for his hotel. They were very happy. Their love
had, circumstantially, that element of melancholy in it that it seems to require
to attain its supremest elevation. And it seemed that their mutual great
misfortune or sin was a bond that nothing could sever.
One day a steamer hove in the offing. Bare-legged and bare-shouldered La Paz
scampered down to the beach, for the arrival of a steamer was their loop-theloop, circus, Emancipation Day and four-o'clock tea.
When the steamer was near enough, wise ones proclaimed that she was the
Pajaro, bound up-coast from Callao to Panama.
The Pajaro put on brakes a mile off shore. Soon a boat came bobbing
shoreward. Merriam strolled down on the beach to look on. In the shallow
water the Carib sailors sprang out and dragged the boat with a mighty rush to
the firm shingle. Out climbed the purser, the captain and two passengers,
ploughing their way through the deep sand toward the hotel. Merriam glanced
toward them with the mild interest due to strangers. There was something
familiar to him in the walk of one of the passengers. He looked again, and his
blood seemed to turn to strawberry ice cream in his veins. Burly, arrogant,
debonair as ever, H. Ferguson Hedges, the man he had killed, was coming

toward him ten feet away.
When Hedges saw Merriam his face flushed a dark red. Then he shouted in his
old, bluff way: "Hello, Merriam. Glad to see you. Didn't expect to find you out
here. Quinby, this is my old friend Merriam, of New York—Merriam, Mr.
Quinby."
Merriam gave Hedges and then Quinby an ice-cold hand. "Br-r-r-r!" said
Hedges. "But you've got a frappéd flipper! Man, you're not well. You're as
yellow as a Chinaman. Malarial here? Steer us to a bar if there is such a thing,
and let's take a prophylactic."
Merriam, still half comatose, led them toward the Hotel Orilla del Mar.
"Quinby and I," explained Hedges, puffing through the slippery sand, "are
looking out along the coast for some investments. We've just come up from
Concepción and Valparaiso and Lima. The captain of this subsidized ferry boat
told us there was some good picking around here in silver mines. So we got
off. Now, where is that café, Merriam? Oh, in this portable soda water
pavilion?"
Leaving Quinby at the bar, Hedges drew Merriam aside.
"Now, what does this mean?" he said, with gruff kindness. "Are you sulking
about that fool row we had?"
"I thought," stammered Merriam—"I heard—they told me you were—that I
had—"
"Well, you didn't, and I'm not," said Hedges. "That fool young ambulance
surgeon told Wade I was a candidate for a coffin just because I'd got tired and
quit breathing. I laid up in a private hospital for a month; but here I am,
kicking as hard as ever. Wade and I tried to find you, but couldn't. Now,
Merriam, shake hands and forget it all. I was as much to blame as you were;
and the shot really did me good—I came out of the hospital as healthy and fit
as a cab horse. Come on; that drink's waiting."
"Old man," said Merriam, brokenly, "I don't know how to thank you—I—well,
you know—"
"Oh, forget it," boomed Hedges. "Quinby'll die of thirst if we don't join him."
Bibb was sitting on the shady side of the gallery waiting for the eleven-o'clock
breakfast. Presently Merriam came out and joined him. His eye was strangely
bright.
"Bibb, my boy," said he, slowly waving his hand, "do you see those mountains
and that sea and sky and sunshine?—they're mine, Bibbsy—all mine."
"You go in," said Bibb, "and take eight grains of quinine, right away. It won't
do in this climate for a man to get to thinking he's Rockefeller, or James

O'Neill either."
Inside, the purser was untying a great roll of newspapers, many of them weeks
old, gathered in the lower ports by the Pajaro to be distributed at casual
stopping-places. Thus do the beneficent voyagers scatter news and
entertainment among the prisoners of sea and mountains.
Tio Pancho, the hotel proprietor, set his great silver-rimmed anteojos upon his
nose and divided the papers into a number of smaller rolls. A barefooted
muchacho dashed in, desiring the post of messenger.
"Bien venido," said Tio Pancho. "This to Señora Conant; that to el Doctor S-SSchlegel—Dios! what a name to say!—that to Señor Davis—one for Don
Alberto. These two for the Casa de Huespedes, Numero 6, en la calle de las
Buenas Gracias. And say to them all, muchacho, that the Pajaro sails for
Panama at three this afternoon. If any have letters to send by the post, let them
come quickly, that they may first pass through the correo."
Mrs. Conant received her roll of newspapers at four o'clock. The boy was late
in delivering them, because he had been deflected from his duty by an iguana
that crossed his path and to which he immediately gave chase. But it made no
hardship, for she had no letters to send.
She was idling in a hammock in the patio of the house that she occupied, half
awake, half happily dreaming of the paradise that she and Merriam had
created out of the wrecks of their pasts. She was content now for the horizon
of that shimmering sea to be the horizon of her life. They had shut out the
world and closed the door.
Merriam was coming to her house at seven, after his dinner at the hotel. She
would put on a white dress and an apricot-coloured lace mantilla, and they
would walk an hour under the cocoanut palms by the lagoon. She smiled
contentedly, and chose a paper at random from the roll the boy had brought.
At first the words of a certain headline of a Sunday newspaper meant nothing
to her; they conveyed only a visualized sense of familiarity. The largest type
ran thus: "Lloyd B. Conant secures divorce." And then the subheadings:
"Well-known Saint Louis paint manufacturer wins suit, pleading one year's
absence of wife." "Her mysterious disappearance recalled." "Nothing has been
heard of her since."
Twisting herself quickly out of the hammock, Mrs. Conant's eye soon
traversed the half-column of the "Recall." It ended thus: "It will be
remembered that Mrs. Conant disappeared one evening in March of last year.
It was freely rumoured that her marriage with Lloyd B. Conant resulted in
much unhappiness. Stories were not wanting to the effect that his cruelty
toward his wife had more than once taken the form of physical abuse. After
her departure a full bottle of tincture of aconite, a deadly poison, was found in

a small medicine cabinet in her bedroom. This might have been an indication
that she meditated suicide. It is supposed that she abandoned such an intention
if she possessed it, and left her home instead."
Mrs. Conant slowly dropped the paper, and sat on a chair, clasping her hands
tightly.
"Let me think—O God!—let me think," she whispered. "I took the bottle with
me . . . I threw it out of the window of the train . . . I— . . . there was another
bottle in the cabinet . . . there were two, side by side—the aconite—and the
valerian that I took when I could not sleep . . . If they found the aconite bottle
full, why—but, he is alive, of course—I gave him only a harmless dose of
valerian . . . I am not a murderess in fact . . . Ralph, I—O God, don't let this be
a dream!"
She went into the part of the house that she rented from the old Peruvian man
and his wife, shut the door, and walked up and down her room swiftly and
feverishly for half an hour. Merriam's photograph stood in a frame on a table.
She picked it up, looked at it with a smile of exquisite tenderness, and—
dropped four tears on it. And Merriam only twenty rods away! Then she stood
still for ten minutes, looking into space. She looked into space through a
slowly opening door. On her side of the door was the building material for a
castle of Romance—love, an Arcady of waving palms, a lullaby of waves on
the shore of a haven of rest, respite, peace, a lotus land of dreamy ease and
security—a life of poetry and heart's ease and refuge. Romanticist, will you
tell me what Mrs. Conant saw on the other side of the door? You cannot?—
that is, you will not? Very well; then listen.
She saw herself go into a department store and buy five spools of silk thread
and three yards of gingham to make an apron for the cook. "Shall I charge it,
ma'am?" asked the clerk. As she walked out a lady whom she met greeted her
cordially. "Oh, where did you get the pattern for those sleeves, dear Mrs.
Conant?" she said. At the corner a policeman helped her across the street and
touched his helmet. "Any callers?" she asked the maid when she reached
home. "Mrs. Waldron," answered the maid, "and the two Misses Jenkinson."
"Very well," she said. "You may bring me a cup of tea, Maggie."
Mrs. Conant went to the door and called Angela, the old Peruvian woman. "If
Mateo is there send him to me." Mateo, a half-breed, shuffling and old but
efficient, came.
"Is there a steamer or a vessel of any kind leaving this coast to-night or tomorrow that I can get passage on?" she asked.
Mateo considered.
"At Punta Reina, thirty miles down the coast, señora," he answered, "there is a
small steamer loading with cinchona and dyewoods. She sails for San

Francisco to-morrow at sunrise. So says my brother, who arrived in his sloop
to-day, passing by Punta Reina."
"You must take me in that sloop to that steamer to-night. Will you do that?"
"Perhaps—" Mateo shrugged a suggestive shoulder. Mrs. Conant took a
handful of money from a drawer and gave it to him.
"Get the sloop ready behind the little point of land below the town," she
ordered. "Get sailors, and be ready to sail at six o'clock. In half an hour bring a
cart partly filled with straw into the patio here, and take my trunk to the sloop.
There is more money yet. Now, hurry."
For one time Mateo walked away without shuffling his feet.
"Angela," cried Mrs. Conant, almost fiercely, "come and help me pack. I am
going away. Out with this trunk. My clothes first. Stir yourself. Those dark
dresses first. Hurry."
From the first she did not waver from her decision. Her view was clear and
final. Her door had opened and let the world in. Her love for Merriam was not
lessened; but it now appeared a hopeless and unrealizable thing. The visions of
their future that had seemed so blissful and complete had vanished. She tried
to assure herself that her renunciation was rather for his sake than for her own.
Now that she was cleared of her burden—at least, technically—would not his
own weigh too heavily upon him? If she should cling to him, would not the
difference forever silently mar and corrode their happiness? Thus she
reasoned; but there were a thousand little voices calling to her that she could
feel rather than hear, like the hum of distant, powerful machinery—the little
voices of the world, that, when raised in unison, can send their insistent call
through the thickest door.
Once while packing, a brief shadow of the lotus dream came back to her. She
held Merriam's picture to her heart with one hand, while she threw a pair of
shoes into the trunk with her other.
At six o'clock Mateo returned and reported the sloop ready. He and his brother
lifted the trunk into the cart, covered it with straw and conveyed it to the point
of embarkation. From there they transferred it on board in the sloop's dory.
Then Mateo returned for additional orders.
Mrs. Conant was ready. She had settled all business matters with Angela, and
was impatiently waiting. She wore a long, loose black-silk duster that she
often walked about in when the evenings were chilly. On her head was a small
round hat, and over it the apricot-coloured lace mantilla.
Dusk had quickly followed the short twilight. Mateo led her by dark and grassgrown streets toward the point behind which the sloop was anchored. On
turning a corner they beheld the Hotel Orilla del Mar three streets away,

nebulously aglow with its array of kerosene lamps.
Mrs. Conant paused, with streaming eyes. "I must, I must see him once before
I go," she murmured in anguish. But even then she did not falter in her
decision. Quickly she invented a plan by which she might speak to him, and
yet make her departure without his knowing. She would walk past the hotel,
ask some one to call him out and talk a few moments on some trivial excuse,
leaving him expecting to see her at her home at seven.
She unpinned her hat and gave it to Mateo. "Keep this, and wait here till I
come," she ordered. Then she draped the mantilla over her head as she usually
did when walking after sunset, and went straight to the Orilla del Mar.
She was glad to see the bulky, white-clad figure of Tio Pancho standing alone
on the gallery.
"Tio Pancho," she said, with a charming smile, "may I trouble you to ask Mr.
Merriam to come out for just a few moments that I may speak with him?"
Tio Pancho bowed as an elephant bows.
"Buenas tardes, Señora Conant," he said, as a cavalier talks. And then he went
on, less at his ease:
"But does not the señora know that Señor Merriam sailed on the Pajaro for
Panama at three o'clock of this afternoon?"

II
THE THEORY AND THE HOUND
Not many days ago my old friend from the tropics, J. P. Bridger, United States
consul on the island of Ratona, was in the city. We had wassail and jubilee and
saw the Flatiron building, and missed seeing the Bronxless menagerie by
about a couple of nights. And then, at the ebb tide, we were walking up a
street that parallels and parodies Broadway.
A woman with a comely and mundane countenance passed us, holding in leash
a wheezing, vicious, waddling, brute of a yellow pug. The dog entangled
himself with Bridger's legs and mumbled his ankles in a snarling, peevish,
sulky bite. Bridger, with a happy smile, kicked the breath out of the brute; the
woman showered us with a quick rain of well-conceived adjectives that left us
in no doubt as to our place in her opinion, and we passed on. Ten yards farther
an old woman with disordered white hair and her bankbook tucked well
hidden beneath her tattered shawl begged. Bridger stopped and disinterred for
her a quarter from his holiday waistcoat.

On the next corner a quarter of a ton of well-clothed man with a ricepowdered, fat, white jowl, stood holding the chain of a devil-born bulldog
whose forelegs were strangers by the length of a dachshund. A little woman in
a last-season's hat confronted him and wept, which was plainly all she could
do, while he cursed her in low sweet, practised tones.
Bridger smiled again—strictly to himself—and this time he took out a little
memorandum book and made a note of it. This he had no right to do without
due explanation, and I said so.
"It's a new theory," said Bridger, "that I picked up down in Ratona. I've been
gathering support for it as I knock about. The world isn't ripe for it yet, but—
well I'll tell you; and then you run your mind back along the people you've
known and see what you make of it."
And so I cornered Bridger in a place where they have artificial palms and
wine; and he told me the story which is here in my words and on his
responsibility.
One afternoon at three o'clock, on the island of Ratona, a boy raced along the
beach screaming, "Pajaro, ahoy!"
Thus he made known the keenness of his hearing and the justice of his
discrimination in pitch.
He who first heard and made oral proclamation concerning the toot of an
approaching steamer's whistle, and correctly named the steamer, was a small
hero in Ratona—until the next steamer came. Wherefore, there was rivalry
among the barefoot youth of Ratona, and many fell victims to the softly blown
conch shells of sloops which, as they enter harbour, sound surprisingly like a
distant steamer's signal. And some could name you the vessel when its call, in
your duller ears, sounded no louder than the sigh of the wind through the
branches of the cocoanut palms.
But to-day he who proclaimed the Pajaro gained his honours. Ratona bent its
ear to listen; and soon the deep-tongued blast grew louder and nearer, and at
length Ratona saw above the line of palms on the low "point" the two black
funnels of the fruiter slowly creeping toward the mouth of the harbour.
You must know that Ratona is an island twenty miles off the south of a South
American republic. It is a port of that republic; and it sleeps sweetly in a
smiling sea, toiling not nor spinning; fed by the abundant tropics where all
things "ripen, cease and fall toward the grave."
Eight hundred people dream life away in a green-embowered village that
follows the horseshoe curve of its bijou harbour. They are mostly Spanish and
Indian mestizos, with a shading of San Domingo Negroes, a lightening of
pure-blood Spanish officials and a slight leavening of the froth of three or four

pioneering white races. No steamers touch at Ratona save the fruit steamers
which take on their banana inspectors there on their way to the coast. They
leave Sunday newspapers, ice, quinine, bacon, watermelons and vaccine
matter at the island and that is about all the touch Ratona gets with the world.
The Pajaro paused at the mouth of the harbour, rolling heavily in the swell that
sent the whitecaps racing beyond the smooth water inside. Already two dories
from the village—one conveying fruit inspectors, the other going for what it
could get—were halfway out to the steamer.
The inspectors' dory was taken on board with them, and the Pajaro steamed
away for the mainland for its load of fruit.
The other boat returned to Ratona bearing a contribution from the Pajaro's
store of ice, the usual roll of newspapers and one passenger—Taylor Plunkett,
sheriff of Chatham County, Kentucky.
Bridger, the United States consul at Ratona, was cleaning his rifle in the
official shanty under a bread-fruit tree twenty yards from the water of the
harbour. The consul occupied a place somewhat near the tail of his political
party's procession. The music of the band wagon sounded very faintly to him
in the distance. The plums of office went to others. Bridger's share of the
spoils—the consulship at Ratona—was little more than a prune—a dried prune
from the boarding-house department of the public crib. But $900 yearly was
opulence in Ratona. Besides, Bridger had contracted a passion for shooting
alligators in the lagoons near his consulate, and was not unhappy.
He looked up from a careful inspection of his rifle lock and saw a broad man
filling his doorway. A broad, noiseless, slow-moving man, sunburned almost
to the brown of Vandyke. A man of forty-five, neatly clothed in homespun,
with scanty light hair, a close-clipped brown-and-gray beard and pale-blue
eyes expressing mildness and simplicity.
"You are Mr. Bridger, the consul," said the broad man. "They directed me
here. Can you tell me what those big bunches of things like gourds are in those
trees that look like feather dusters along the edge of the water?"
"Take that chair," said the consul, reoiling his cleaning rag. "No, the other one
—that bamboo thing won't hold you. Why, they're cocoanuts—green
cocoanuts. The shell of 'em is always a light green before they're ripe."
"Much obliged," said the other man, sitting down carefully. "I didn't quite like
to tell the folks at home they were olives unless I was sure about it. My name
is Plunkett. I'm sheriff of Chatham County, Kentucky. I've got extradition
papers in my pocket authorizing the arrest of a man on this island. They've
been signed by the President of this country, and they're in correct shape. The
man's name is Wade Williams. He's in the cocoanut raising business. What
he's wanted for is the murder of his wife two years ago. Where can I find

him?"
The consul squinted an eye and looked through his rifle barrel.
"There's nobody on the island who calls himself 'Williams,'" he remarked.
"Didn't suppose there was," said Plunkett mildly. "He'll do by any other
name."
"Besides myself," said Bridger, "there are only two Americans on Ratona—
Bob Reeves and Henry Morgan."
"The man I want sells cocoanuts," suggested Plunkett.
"You see that cocoanut walk extending up to the point?" said the consul,
waving his hand toward the open door. "That belongs to Bob Reeves. Henry
Morgan owns half the trees to loo'ard on the island."
"One, month ago," said the sheriff, "Wade Williams wrote a confidential letter
to a man in Chatham county, telling him where he was and how he was getting
along. The letter was lost; and the person that found it gave it away. They sent
me after him, and I've got the papers. I reckon he's one of your cocoanut men
for certain."
"You've got his picture, of course," said Bridger. "It might be Reeves or
Morgan, but I'd hate to think it. They're both as fine fellows as you'd meet in
an all-day auto ride."
"No," doubtfully answered Plunkett; "there wasn't any picture of Williams to
be had. And I never saw him myself. I've been sheriff only a year. But I've got
a pretty accurate description of him. About 5 feet 11; dark-hair and eyes; nose
inclined to be Roman; heavy about the shoulders; strong, white teeth, with
none missing; laughs a good deal, talkative; drinks considerably but never to
intoxication; looks you square in the eye when talking; age thirty-five. Which
one of your men does that description fit?"
The consul grinned broadly.
"I'll tell you what you do," he said, laying down his rifle and slipping on his
dingy black alpaca coat. "You come along, Mr. Plunkett, and I'll take you up to
see the boys. If you can tell which one of 'em your description fits better than
it does the other you have the advantage of me."
Bridger conducted the sheriff out and along the hard beach close to which the
tiny houses of the village were distributed. Immediately back of the town rose
sudden, small, thickly wooded hills. Up one of these, by means of steps cut in
the hard clay, the consul led Plunkett. On the very verge of an eminence was
perched a two-room wooden cottage with a thatched roof. A Carib woman was
washing clothes outside. The consul ushered the sheriff to the door of the
room that overlooked the harbour.

Two men were in the room, about to sit down, in their shirt sleeves, to a table
spread for dinner. They bore little resemblance one to the other in detail; but
the general description given by Plunkett could have been justly applied to
either. In height, colour of hair, shape of nose, build and manners each of them
tallied with it. They were fair types of jovial, ready-witted, broad-gauged
Americans who had gravitated together for companionship in an alien land.
"Hello, Bridger" they called in unison at sight Of the consul. "Come and have
dinner with us!" And then they noticed Plunkett at his heels, and came forward
with hospitable curiosity.
"Gentlemen," said the consul, his voice taking on unaccustomed formality,
"this is Mr. Plunkett. Mr. Plunkett—Mr. Reeves and Mr. Morgan."
The cocoanut barons greeted the newcomer joyously. Reeves seemed about an
inch taller than Morgan, but his laugh was not quite as loud. Morgan's eyes
were deep brown; Reeves's were black. Reeves was the host and busied
himself with fetching other chairs and calling to the Carib woman for
supplemental table ware. It was explained that Morgan lived in a bamboo
shack to “loo'ard,” but that every day the two friends dined together. Plunkett
stood still during the preparations, looking about mildly with his pale-blue
eyes. Bridger looked apologetic and uneasy.
At length two other covers were laid and the company was assigned to places.
Reeves and Morgan stood side by side across the table from the visitors.
Reeves nodded genially as a signal for all to seat themselves. And then
suddenly Plunkett raised his hand with a gesture of authority. He was looking
straight between Reeves and Morgan.
"Wade Williams," he said quietly, "you are under arrest for murder."
Reeves and Morgan instantly exchanged a quick, bright glance, the quality of
which was interrogation, with a seasoning of surprise. Then, simultaneously
they turned to the speaker with a puzzled and frank deprecation in their gaze.
"Can't say that we understand you, Mr. Plunkett," said Morgan, cheerfully.
"Did you say 'Williams'?"
"What's the joke, Bridgy?" asked Reeves, turning, to the consul with a smile.
Before Bridger could answer Plunkett spoke again.
"I'll explain," he said, quietly. "One of you don't need any explanation, but this
is for the other one. One of you is Wade Williams of Chatham County,
Kentucky. You murdered your wife on May 5, two years ago, after ill-treating
and abusing her continually for five years. I have the proper papers in my
pocket for taking you back with me, and you are going. We will return on the
fruit steamer that comes back by this island to-morrow to leave its inspectors. I
acknowledge, gentlemen, that I'm not quite sure which one of you is Williams.

But Wade Williams goes back to Chatham County to-morrow. I want you to
understand that."
A great sound of merry laughter from Morgan and Reeves went out over the
still harbour. Two or three fishermen in the fleet of sloops anchored there
looked up at the house of the diablos Americanos on the hill and wondered.
"My dear Mr. Plunkett," cried Morgan, conquering his mirth, "the dinner is
getting, cold. Let us sit down and eat. I am anxious to get my spoon into that
shark-fin soup. Business afterward."
"Sit down, gentlemen, if you please," added Reeves, pleasantly. "I am sure Mr.
Plunkett will not object. Perhaps a little time may be of advantage to him in
identifying—the gentleman he wishes to arrest."
"No objections, I'm sure," said Plunkett, dropping into his chair heavily. "I'm
hungry myself. I didn't want to accept the hospitality of you folks without
giving you notice; that's all."
Reeves set bottles and glasses on the table.
"There's cognac," he said, "and anisada, and Scotch 'smoke,' and rye. Take
your choice."
Bridger chose rye, Reeves poured three fingers of Scotch for himself, Morgan
took the same. The sheriff, against much protestation, filled his glass from the
water bottle.
"Here's to the appetite," said Reeves, raising his glass, "of Mr. Williams!"
Morgan's laugh and his drink encountering sent him into a choking splutter.
All began to pay attention to the dinner, which was well cooked and palatable.
"Williams!" called Plunkett, suddenly and sharply.
All looked up wonderingly. Reeves found the sheriff's mild eye resting upon
him. He flushed a little.
"See here," he said, with some asperity, "my name's Reeves, and I don't want
you to—" But the comedy of the thing came to his rescue, and he ended with a
laugh.
"I suppose, Mr. Plunkett," said Morgan, carefully seasoning an alligator pear,
"that you are aware of the fact that you will import a good deal of trouble for
yourself into Kentucky if you take back the wrong man—that is, of course, if
you take anybody back?"
"Thank you for the salt," said the sheriff. "Oh, I'll take somebody back. It'll be
one of you two gentlemen. Yes, I know I'd get stuck for damages if I make a
mistake. But I'm going to try to get the right man."
"I'll tell you what you do," said Morgan, leaning forward with a jolly twinkle
in his eyes. "You take me. I'll go without any trouble. The cocoanut business

hasn't panned out well this year, and I'd like to make some extra money out of
your bondsmen."
"That's not fair," chimed in Reeves. "I got only $16 a thousand for my last
shipment. Take me, Mr. Plunkett."
"I'll take Wade Williams," said the sheriff, patiently, "or I'll come pretty close
to it."
"It's like dining with a ghost," remarked Morgan, with a pretended shiver.
"The ghost of a murderer, too! Will somebody pass the toothpicks to the shade
of the naughty Mr. Williams?"
Plunkett seemed as unconcerned as if he were dining at his own table in
Chatham County. He was a gallant trencherman, and the strange tropic viands
tickled his palate. Heavy, commonplace, almost slothful in his movements, he
appeared to be devoid of all the cunning and watchfulness of the sleuth. He
even ceased to observe, with any sharpness or attempted discrimination, the
two men, one of whom he had undertaken with surprising self-confidence, to
drag away upon the serious charge of wife-murder. Here, indeed, was a
problem set before him that if wrongly solved would have amounted to his
serious discomfiture, yet there he sat puzzling his soul (to all appearances)
over the novel flavour of a broiled iguana cutlet.
The consul felt a decided discomfort. Reeves and Morgan were his friends and
pals; yet the sheriff from Kentucky had a certain right to his official aid and
moral support. So Bridger sat the silentest around the board and tried to
estimate the peculiar situation. His conclusion was that both Reeves and
Morgan, quickwitted, as he knew them to be, had conceived at the moment of
Plunkett's disclosure of his mission—and in the brief space of a lightning flash
—the idea that the other might be the guilty Williams; and that each of them
had decided in that moment loyally to protect his comrade against the doom
that threatened him. This was the consul's theory and if he had been a
bookmaker at a race of wits for life and liberty he would have offered heavy
odds against the plodding sheriff from Chatham County, Kentucky.
When the meal was concluded the Carib woman came and removed the dishes
and cloth. Reeves strewed the table with excellent cigars, and Plunkett, with
the others, lighted one of these with evident gratification.
"I may be dull," said Morgan, with a grin and a wink at Bridger; "but I want to
know if I am. Now, I say this is all a joke of Mr. Plunkett's, concocted to
frighten two babes-in-the-woods. Is this Williamson to be taken seriously or
not?"
"'Williams,'" corrected Plunkett gravely. "I never got off any jokes in my life. I
know I wouldn't travel 2,000 miles to get off a poor one as this would be if I
didn't take Wade Williams back with me. Gentlemen!" continued the sheriff,

now letting his mild eyes travel impartially from one of the company to
another, "see if you can find any joke in this case. Wade Williams is listening
to the words I utter now; but out of politeness, I will speak of him as a third
person. For five years he made his wife lead the life of a dog—No; I'll take
that back. No dog in Kentucky was ever treated as she was. He spent the
money that she brought him—spent it at races, at the card table and on horses
and hunting. He was a good fellow to his friends, but a cold, sullen demon at
home. He wound up the five years of neglect by striking her with his closed
hand—a hand as hard as a stone—when she was ill and weak from suffering.
She died the next day; and he skipped. That's all there is to it. It's enough. I
never saw Williams; but I knew his wife. I'm not a man to tell half. She and I
were keeping company when she met him. She went to Louisville on a visit
and saw him there. I'll admit that he spoilt my chances in no time. I lived then
on the edge of the Cumberland mountains. I was elected sheriff of Chatham
County a year after Wade Williams killed his wife. My official duty sends me
out here after him; but I'll admit that there's personal feeling, too. And he's
going back with me. Mr.—er—Reeves, will you pass me a match?
"Awfully imprudent of Williams," said Morgan, putting his feet up against the
wall, "to strike a Kentucky lady. Seems to me I've heard they were scrappers."
"Bad, bad Williams," said Reeves, pouring out more Scotch.
The two men spoke lightly, but the consul saw and felt the tension and the
carefulness in their actions and words. "Good old fellows," he said to himself;
"they're both all right. Each of 'em is standing by the other like a little brick
church."
And then a dog walked into the room where they sat—a black-and-tan hound,
long-eared, lazy, confident of welcome.
Plunkett turned his head and looked at the animal, which halted, confidently,
within a few feet of his chair.
Suddenly the sheriff, with a deep-mouthed oath, left his seat and, bestowed
upon the dog a vicious and heavy kick, with his ponderous shoe.
The hound, heartbroken, astonished, with flapping ears and incurved tail,
uttered a piercing yelp of pain and surprise.
Reeves and the consul remained in their chairs, saying nothing, but astonished
at the unexpected show of intolerance from the easy-going man from Chatham
county.
But Morgan, with a suddenly purpling face, leaped, to his feet and raised a
threatening arm above the guest.
"You—brute!" he shouted, passionately; "why did you do that?"
Quickly the amenities returned, Plunkett muttered some indistinct apology and

regained his seat. Morgan with a decided effort controlled his indignation and
also returned to his chair.
And then Plunkett with the spring of a tiger, leaped around the corner of the
table and snapped handcuffs on the paralyzed Morgan's wrists.
"Hound-lover and woman-killer!" he cried; "get ready to meet your God."
When Bridger had finished I asked him:
"Did he get the right man?"
"He did," said the Consul.
"And how did he know?" I inquired, being in a kind of bewilderment.
"When he put Morgan in the dory," answered Bridger, "the next day to take
him aboard the Pajaro, this man Plunkett stopped to shake hands with me and I
asked him the same question."
"'Mr. Bridger,' said he, 'I'm a Kentuckian, and I've seen a great deal of both
men and animals. And I never yet saw a man that was overfond of horses and
dogs but what was cruel to women.'"

III
THE HYPOTHESES OF FAILURE
Lawyer Gooch bestowed his undivided attention upon the engrossing arts of
his profession. But one flight of fancy did he allow his mind to entertain. He
was fond of likening his suite of office rooms to the bottom of a ship. The
rooms were three in number, with a door opening from one to another. These
doors could also be closed.
"Ships," Lawyer Gooch would say, "are constructed for safety, with separate,
water-tight compartments in their bottoms. If one compartment springs a leak
it fills with water; but the good ship goes on unhurt. Were it not for the
separating bulkheads one leak would sink the vessel. Now it often happens
that while I am occupied with clients, other clients with conflicting interests
call. With the assistance of Archibald—an office boy with a future—I cause
the dangerous influx to be diverted into separate compartments, while I sound
with my legal plummet the depth of each. If necessary, they may be baled into
the hallway and permitted to escape by way of the stairs, which we may term
the lee scuppers. Thus the good ship of business is kept afloat; whereas if the
element that supports her were allowed to mingle freely in her hold we might
be swamped—ha, ha, ha!"
The law is dry. Good jokes are few. Surely it might be permitted Lawyer

Gooch to mitigate the bore of briefs, the tedium of torts and the prosiness of
processes with even so light a levy upon the good property of humour.
Lawyer Gooch's practice leaned largely to the settlement of marital infelicities.
Did matrimony languish through complications, he mediated, soothed and
arbitrated. Did it suffer from implications, he readjusted, defended and
championed. Did it arrive at the extremity of duplications, he always got light
sentences for his clients.
But not always was Lawyer Gooch the keen, armed, wily belligerent, ready
with his two-edged sword to lop off the shackles of Hymen. He had been
known to build up instead of demolishing, to reunite instead of severing, to
lead erring and foolish ones back into the fold instead of scattering the flock.
Often had he by his eloquent and moving appeals sent husband and wife,
weeping, back into each other's arms. Frequently he had coached childhood so
successfully that, at the psychological moment (and at a given signal) the
plaintive pipe of "Papa, won't you tum home adain to me and muvver?" had
won the day and upheld the pillars of a tottering home.
Unprejudiced persons admitted that Lawyer Gooch received as big fees from
these reyoked clients as would have been paid him had the cases been
contested in court. Prejudiced ones intimated that his fees were doubled,
because the penitent couples always came back later for the divorce, anyhow.
There came a season in June when the legal ship of Lawyer Gooch (to borrow
his own figure) was nearly becalmed. The divorce mill grinds slowly in June.
It is the month of Cupid and Hymen.
Lawyer Gooch, then, sat idle in the middle room of his clientless suite. A
small anteroom connected—or rather separated—this apartment from the
hallway. Here was stationed Archibald, who wrested from visitors their cards
or oral nomenclature which he bore to his master while they waited.
Suddenly, on this day, there came a great knocking at the outermost door.
Archibald, opening it, was thrust aside as superfluous by the visitor, who
without due reverence at once penetrated to the office of Lawyer Gooch and
threw himself with good-natured insolence into a comfortable chair facing that
gentlemen.
"You are Phineas C. Gooch, attorney-at-law?" said the visitor, his tone of
voice and inflection making his words at once a question, an assertion and an
accusation.
Before committing himself by a reply, the lawyer estimated his possible client
in one of his brief but shrewd and calculating glances.
The man was of the emphatic type—large-sized, active, bold and debonair in
demeanour, vain beyond a doubt, slightly swaggering, ready and at ease. He

was well-clothed, but with a shade too much ornateness. He was seeking a
lawyer; but if that fact would seem to saddle him with troubles they were not
patent in his beaming eye and courageous air.
"My name is Gooch," at length the lawyer admitted. Upon pressure he would
also have confessed to the Phineas C. But he did not consider it good practice
to volunteer information. "I did not receive your card," he continued, by way
of rebuke, "so I—"
"I know you didn't," remarked the visitor, coolly; "And you won't just yet.
Light up?" He threw a leg over an arm of his chair, and tossed a handful of
rich-hued cigars upon the table. Lawyer Gooch knew the brand. He thawed
just enough to accept the invitation to smoke.
"You are a divorce lawyer," said the cardless visitor. This time there was no
interrogation in his voice. Nor did his words constitute a simple assertion.
They formed a charge—a denunciation—as one would say to a dog: "You are
a dog." Lawyer Gooch was silent under the imputation.
"You handle," continued the visitor, "all the various ramifications of busted-up
connubiality. You are a surgeon, we might saw, who extracts Cupid's darts
when he shoots 'em into the wrong parties. You furnish patent, incandescent
lights for premises where the torch of Hymen has burned so low you can't
light a cigar at it. Am I right, Mr. Gooch?"
"I have undertaken cases," said the lawyer, guardedly, "in the line to which
your figurative speech seems to refer. Do you wish to consult me
professionally, Mr. ––––" The lawyer paused, with significance.
"Not yet," said the other, with an arch wave of his cigar, "not just yet. Let us
approach the subject with the caution that should have been used in the
original act that makes this pow-wow necessary. There exists a matrimonial
jumble to be straightened out. But before I give you names I want your honest
—well, anyhow, your professional opinion on the merits of the mix-up. I want
you to size up the catastrophe—abstractly—you understand? I'm Mr. Nobody;
and I've got a story to tell you. Then you say what's what. Do you get my
wireless?"
"You want to state a hypothetical case?" suggested Lawyer Gooch.
"That's the word I was after. 'Apothecary' was the best shot I could make at it
in my mind. The hypothetical goes. I'll state the case. Suppose there's a
woman—a deuced fine-looking woman—who has run away from her husband
and home? She's badly mashed on another man who went to her town to work
up some real estate business. Now, we may as well call this woman's husband
Thomas R. Billings, for that's his name. I'm giving you straight tips on the
cognomens. The Lothario chap is Henry K. Jessup. The Billingses lived in a
little town called Susanville—a good many miles from here. Now, Jessup

leaves Susanville two weeks ago. The next day Mrs. Billings follows him.
She's dead gone on this man Jessup; you can bet your law library on that."
Lawyer Gooch's client said this with such unctuous satisfaction that even the
callous lawyer experienced a slight ripple of repulsion. He now saw clearly in
his fatuous visitor the conceit of the lady-killer, the egoistic complacency of
the successful trifler.
"Now," continued the visitor, "suppose this Mrs. Billings wasn't happy at
home? We'll say she and her husband didn't gee worth a cent. They've got
incompatibility to burn. The things she likes, Billings wouldn't have as a gift
with trading-stamps. It's Tabby and Rover with them all the time. She's an
educated woman in science and culture, and she reads things out loud at
meetings. Billings is not on. He don't appreciate progress and obelisks and
ethics, and things of that sort. Old Billings is simply a blink when it comes to
such things. The lady is out and out above his class. Now, lawyer, don't it look
like a fair equalization of rights and wrongs that a woman like that should be
allowed to throw down Billings and take the man that can appreciate her?
"Incompatibility," said Lawyer Gooch, "is undoubtedly the source of much
marital discord and unhappiness. Where it is positively proved, divorce would
seem to be the equitable remedy. Are you—excuse me—is this man Jessup
one to whom the lady may safely trust her future?"
"Oh, you can bet on Jessup," said the client, with a confident wag of his head.
"Jessup's all right. He'll do the square thing. Why, he left Susanville just to
keep people from talking about Mrs. Billings. But she followed him up, and
now, of course, he'll stick to her. When she gets a divorce, all legal and proper,
Jessup will do the proper thing."
"And now," said Lawyer Gooch, "continuing the hypothesis, if you prefer, and
supposing that my services should be desired in the case, what—"
The client rose impulsively to his feet.
"Oh, dang the hypothetical business," he exclaimed, impatiently. "Let's let her
drop, and get down to straight talk. You ought to know who I am by this time.
I want that woman to have her divorce. I'll pay for it. The day you set Mrs.
Billings free I'll pay you five hundred dollars."
Lawyer Gooch's client banged his fist upon the table to punctuate his
generosity.
"If that is the case—" began the lawyer.
"Lady to see you, sir," bawled Archibald, bouncing in from his anteroom. He
had orders to always announce immediately any client that might come. There
was no sense in turning business away.
Lawyer Gooch took client number one by the arm and led him suavely into

one of the adjoining rooms. "Favour me by remaining here a few minutes, sir,"
said he. "I will return and resume our consultation with the least possible
delay. I am rather expecting a visit from a very wealthy old lady in connection
with a will. I will not keep you waiting long."
The breezy gentleman seated himself with obliging acquiescence, and took up
a magazine. The lawyer returned to the middle office, carefully closing behind
him the connecting door.
"Show the lady in, Archibald," he said to the office boy, who was awaiting the
order.
A tall lady, of commanding presence and sternly handsome, entered the room.
She wore robes—robes; not clothes—ample and fluent. In her eye could be
perceived the lambent flame of genius and soul. In her hand was a green bag
of the capacity of a bushel, and an umbrella that also seemed to wear a robe,
ample and fluent. She accepted a chair.
"Are you Mr. Phineas C. Gooch, the lawyer?" she asked, in formal and
unconciliatory tones.
"I am," answered Lawyer Gooch, without circumlocution. He never
circumlocuted when dealing with a woman. Women circumlocute. Time is
wasted when both sides in debate employ the same tactics.
"As a lawyer, sir," began the lady, "you may have acquired some knowledge of
the human heart. Do you believe that the pusillanimous and petty conventions
of our artificial social life should stand as an obstacle in the way of a noble
and affectionate heart when it finds its true mate among the miserable and
worthless wretches in the world that are called men?"
"Madam," said Lawyer Gooch, in the tone that he used in curbing his female
clients, "this is an office for conducting the practice of law. I am a lawyer, not
a philosopher, nor the editor of an 'Answers to the Lovelorn' column of a
newspaper. I have other clients waiting. I will ask you kindly to come to the
point."
"Well, you needn't get so stiff around the gills about it," said the lady, with a
snap of her luminous eyes and a startling gyration of her umbrella. "Business
is what I've come for. I want your opinion in the matter of a suit for divorce, as
the vulgar would call it, but which is really only the readjustment of the false
and ignoble conditions that the short-sighted laws of man have interposed
between a loving—"
"I beg your pardon, madam," interrupted Lawyer Gooch, with some
impatience, "for reminding you again that this is a law office. Perhaps Mrs.
Wilcox—"
"Mrs. Wilcox is all right," cut in the lady, with a hint of asperity. "And so are

Tolstoi, and Mrs. Gertrude Atherton, and Omar Khayyam, and Mr. Edward
Bok. I've read 'em all. I would like to discuss with you the divine right of the
soul as opposed to the freedom-destroying restrictions of a bigoted and
narrow-minded society. But I will proceed to business. I would prefer to lay
the matter before you in an impersonal way until you pass upon its merits.
That is to describe it as a supposable instance, without—"
"You wish to state a hypothetical case?" said Lawyer Gooch.
"I was going to say that," said the lady, sharply. "Now, suppose there is a
woman who is all soul and heart and aspirations for a complete existence. This
woman has a husband who is far below her in intellect, in taste—in
everything. Bah! he is a brute. He despises literature. He sneers at the lofty
thoughts of the world's great thinkers. He thinks only of real estate and such
sordid things. He is no mate for a woman with soul. We will say that this
unfortunate wife one day meets with her ideal—a man with brain and heart
and force. She loves him. Although this man feels the thrill of a new-found
affinity he is too noble, too honourable to declare himself. He flies from the
presence of his beloved. She flies after him, trampling, with superb
indifference, upon the fetters with which an unenlightened social system
would bind her. Now, what will a divorce cost? Eliza Ann Timmins, the
poetess of Sycamore Gap, got one for three hundred and forty dollars. Can I—
I mean can this lady I speak of get one that cheap?"
"Madam," said Lawyer Gooch, "your last two or three sentences delight me
with their intelligence and clearness. Can we not now abandon the
hypothetical and come down to names and business?"
"I should say so," exclaimed the lady, adopting the practical with admirable
readiness. "Thomas R. Billings is the name of the low brute who stands
between the happiness of his legal—his legal, but not his spiritual—wife and
Henry K. Jessup, the noble man whom nature intended for her mate. I,"
concluded the client, with an air of dramatic revelation, "am Mrs. Billings!"
"Gentlemen to see you, sir," shouted Archibald, invading the room almost at a
handspring. Lawyer Gooch arose from his chair.
"Mrs. Billings," he said courteously, "allow me to conduct you into the
adjoining office apartment for a few minutes. I am expecting a very wealthy
old gentleman on business connected with a will. In a very short while I will
join you, and continue our consultation."
With his accustomed chivalrous manner, Lawyer Gooch ushered his soulful
client into the remaining unoccupied room, and came out, closing the door
with circumspection.
The next visitor introduced by Archibald was a thin, nervous, irritable-looking
man of middle age, with a worried and apprehensive expression of

countenance. He carried in one hand a small satchel, which he set down upon
the floor beside the chair which the lawyer placed for him. His clothing was of
good quality, but it was worn without regard to neatness or style, and appeared
to be covered with the dust of travel.
"You make a specialty of divorce cases," he said, in, an agitated but businesslike tone.
"I may say," began Lawyer Gooch, "that my practice has not altogether
avoided—"
"I know you do," interrupted client number three. "You needn't tell me. I've
heard all about you. I have a case to lay before you without necessarily
disclosing any connection that I might have with it—that is—"
"You wish," said Lawyer Gooch, "to state a hypothetical case.
"You may call it that. I am a plain man of business. I will be as brief as
possible. We will first take up hypothetical woman. We will say she is married
uncongenially. In many ways she is a superior woman. Physically she is
considered to be handsome. She is devoted to what she calls literature—poetry
and prose, and such stuff. Her husband is a plain man in the business walks of
life. Their home has not been happy, although the husband has tried to make it
so. Some time ago a man—a stranger—came to the peaceful town in which
they lived and engaged in some real estate operations. This woman met him,
and became unaccountably infatuated with him. Her attentions became so
open that the man felt the community to be no safe place for him, so he left it.
She abandoned husband and home, and followed him. She forsook her home,
where she was provided with every comfort, to follow this man who had
inspired her with such a strange affection. Is there anything more to be
deplored," concluded the client, in a trembling voice, "than the wrecking of a
home by a woman's uncalculating folly?"
Lawyer Gooch delivered the cautious opinion that there was not.
"This man she has gone to join," resumed the visitor, "is not the man to make
her happy. It is a wild and foolish self-deception that makes her think he will.
Her husband, in spite of their many disagreements, is the only one capable of
dealing with her sensitive and peculiar nature. But this she does not realize
now."
"Would you consider a divorce the logical cure in the case you present?" asked
Lawyer Gooch, who felt that the conversation was wandering too far from the
field of business.
"A divorce!" exclaimed the client, feelingly—almost tearfully. "No, no—not
that. I have read, Mr. Gooch, of many instances where your sympathy and
kindly interest led you to act as a mediator between estranged husband and

wife, and brought them together again. Let us drop the hypothetical case—I
need conceal no longer that it is I who am the sufferer in this sad affair—the
names you shall have—Thomas R. Billings and wife—and Henry K. Jessup,
the man with whom she is infatuated."
Client number three laid his hand upon Mr. Gooch's arm. Deep emotion was
written upon his careworn face. "For Heaven's sake", he said fervently, "help
me in this hour of trouble. Seek out Mrs. Billings, and persuade her to
abandon this distressing pursuit of her lamentable folly. Tell her, Mr. Gooch,
that her husband is willing to receive her back to his heart and home—promise
her anything that will induce her to return. I have heard of your success in
these matters. Mrs. Billings cannot be very far away. I am worn out with travel
and weariness. Twice during the pursuit I saw her, but various circumstances
prevented our having an interview. Will you undertake this mission for me,
Mr. Gooch, and earn my everlasting gratitude?"
"It is true," said Lawyer Gooch, frowning slightly at the other's last words, but
immediately calling up an expression of virtuous benevolence, "that on a
number of occasions I have been successful in persuading couples who sought
the severing of their matrimonial bonds to think better of their rash intentions
and return to their homes reconciled. But I assure you that the work is often
exceedingly difficult. The amount of argument, perseverance, and, if I may be
allowed to say it, eloquence that it requires would astonish you. But this is a
case in which my sympathies would be wholly enlisted. I feel deeply for you
sir, and I would be most happy to see husband and wife reunited. But my
time," concluded the lawyer, looking at his watch as if suddenly reminded of
the fact, "is valuable."
"I am aware of that," said the client, "and if you will take the case and
persuade Mrs. Billings to return home and leave the man alone that she is
following—on that day I will pay you the sum of one thousand dollars. I have
made a little money in real estate during the recent boom in Susanville, and I
will not begrudge that amount."
"Retain your seat for a few moments, please," said Lawyer Gooch, arising, and
again consulting his watch. "I have another client waiting in an adjoining room
whom I had very nearly forgotten. I will return in the briefest possible space."
The situation was now one that fully satisfied Lawyer Gooch's love of
intricacy and complication. He revelled in cases that presented such subtle
problems and possibilities. It pleased him to think that he was master of the
happiness and fate of the three individuals who sat, unconscious of one
another's presence, within his reach. His old figure of the ship glided into his
mind. But now the figure failed, for to have filled every compartment of an
actual vessel would have been to endanger her safety; with his compartments
full, his ship of affairs could but sail on to the advantageous port of a fine, fat

fee. The thing for him to do, of course, was to wring the best bargain he could
from some one of his anxious cargo.
First he called to the office boy: "Lock the outer door, Archibald, and admit no
one." Then he moved, with long, silent strides into the room in which client
number one waited. That gentleman sat, patiently scanning the pictures in the
magazine, with a cigar in his mouth and his feet upon a table.
"Well," he remarked, cheerfully, as the lawyer entered, "have you made up
your mind? Does five hundred dollars go for getting the fair lady a divorce?"
"You mean that as a retainer?" asked Lawyer Gooch, softly interrogative.
"Hey? No; for the whole job. It's enough, ain't it?"
"My fee," said Lawyer Gooch, "would be one thousand five hundred dollars.
Five hundred dollars down, and the remainder upon issuance of the divorce."
A loud whistle came from client number one. His feet descended to the floor.
"Guess we can't close the deal," he said, arising, "I cleaned up five hundred
dollars in a little real estate dicker down in Susanville. I'd do anything I could
to free the lady, but it out-sizes my pile."
"Could you stand one thousand two hundred dollars?" asked the lawyer,
insinuatingly.
"Five hundred is my limit, I tell you. Guess I'll have to hunt up a cheaper
lawyer." The client put on his hat.
"Out this way, please," said Lawyer Gooch, opening the door that led into the
hallway.
As the gentleman flowed out of the compartment and down the stairs, Lawyer
Gooch smiled to himself. "Exit Mr. Jessup," he murmured, as he fingered the
Henry Clay tuft of hair at his ear. "And now for the forsaken husband." He
returned to the middle office, and assumed a businesslike manner.
"I understand," he said to client number three, "that you agree to pay one
thousand dollars if I bring about, or am instrumental in bringing about, the
return of Mrs. Billings to her home, and her abandonment of her infatuated
pursuit of the man for whom she has conceived such a violent fancy. Also that
the case is now unreservedly in my hands on that basis. Is that correct?"
"Entirely", said the other, eagerly. "And I can produce the cash any time at two
hours' notice."
Lawyer Gooch stood up at his full height. His thin figure seemed to expand.
His thumbs sought the arm-holes of his vest. Upon his face was a look of
sympathetic benignity that he always wore during such undertakings.
"Then, sir," he said, in kindly tones, "I think I can promise you an early relief

from your troubles. I have that much confidence in my powers of argument
and persuasion, in the natural impulses of the human heart toward good, and in
the strong influence of a husband's unfaltering love. Mrs. Billings, sir, is here
—in that room—" the lawyer's long arm pointed to the door. "I will call her in
at once; and our united pleadings—"
Lawyer Gooch paused, for client number three had leaped from his chair as if
propelled by steel springs, and clutched his satchel.
"What the devil," he exclaimed, harshly, "do you mean? That woman in there!
I thought I shook her off forty miles back."
He ran to the open window, looked out below, and threw one leg over the sill.
"Stop!" cried Lawyer Gooch, in amazement. "What would you do? Come, Mr.
Billings, and face your erring but innocent wife. Our combined entreaties
cannot fail to—"
"Billings!" shouted the now thoroughly moved client. "I'll Billings you, you
old idiot!"
Turning, he hurled his satchel with fury at the lawyer's head. It struck that
astounded peacemaker between the eyes, causing him to stagger backward a
pace or two. When Lawyer Gooch recovered his wits he saw that his client
had disappeared. Rushing to the window, he leaned out, and saw the recreant
gathering himself up from the top of a shed upon which he had dropped from
the second-story window. Without stopping to collect his hat he then plunged
downward the remaining ten feet to the alley, up which he flew with
prodigious celerity until the surrounding building swallowed him up from
view.
Lawyer Gooch passed his hand tremblingly across his brow. It was a habitual
act with him, serving to clear his thoughts. Perhaps also it now seemed to
soothe the spot where a very hard alligator-hide satchel had struck.
The satchel lay upon the floor, wide open, with its contents spilled about.
Mechanically, Lawyer Gooch stooped to gather up the articles. The first was a
collar; and the omniscient eye of the man of law perceived, wonderingly, the
initials H. K. J. marked upon it. Then came a comb, a brush, a folded map, and
a piece of soap. Lastly, a handful of old business letters, addressed—every one
of them—to "Henry K. Jessup, Esq."
Lawyer Gooch closed the satchel, and set it upon the table. He hesitated for a
moment, and then put on his hat and walked into the office boy's anteroom.
"Archibald," he said mildly, as he opened the hall door, "I am going around to
the Supreme Court rooms. In five minutes you may step into the inner office,
and inform the lady who is waiting there that"—here Lawyer Gooch made use
of the vernacular—"that there's nothing doing."

IV
CALLOWAY'S CODE
The New York Enterprise sent H. B. Calloway as special correspondent to the
Russo-Japanese-Portsmouth war.
For two months Calloway hung about Yokohama and Tokio, shaking dice with
the other correspondents for drinks of 'rickshaws—oh, no, that's something to
ride in; anyhow, he wasn't earning the salary that his paper was paying him.
But that was not Calloway's fault. The little brown men who held the strings of
Fate between their fingers were not ready for the readers of the Enterprise to
season their breakfast bacon and eggs with the battles of the descendants of
the gods.
But soon the column of correspondents that were to go out with the First Army
tightened their field-glass belts and went down to the Yalu with Kuroki.
Calloway was one of these.
Now, this is no history of the battle of the Yalu River. That has been told in
detail by the correspondents who gazed at the shrapnel smoke rings from a
distance of three miles. But, for justice's sake, let it be understood that the
Japanese commander prohibited a nearer view.
Calloway's feat was accomplished before the battle. What he did was to
furnish the Enterprise with the biggest beat of the war. That paper published
exclusively and in detail the news of the attack on the lines of the Russian
General on the same day that it was made. No other paper printed a word
about it for two days afterward, except a London paper, whose account was
absolutely incorrect and untrue.
Calloway did this in face of the fact that General Kuroki was making his
moves and laying his plans with the profoundest secrecy as far as the world
outside his camps was concerned. The correspondents were forbidden to send
out any news whatever of his plans; and every message that was allowed on
the wires was censored with rigid severity.
The correspondent for the London paper handed in a cablegram describing
Kuroki's plans; but as it was wrong from beginning to end the censor grinned
and let it go through.
So, there they were—Kuroki on one side of the Yalu with forty-two thousand
infantry, five thousand cavalry, and one hundred and twenty-four guns. On the
other side, Zassulitch waited for him with only twenty-three thousand men,
and with a long stretch of river to guard. And Calloway had got hold of some

important inside information that he knew would bring the Enterprise staff
around a cablegram as thick as flies around a Park Row lemonade stand. If he
could only get that message past the censor—the new censor who had arrived
and taken his post that day!
Calloway did the obviously proper thing. He lit his pipe and sat down on a gun
carriage to think it over. And there we must leave him; for the rest of the story
belongs to Vesey, a sixteen-dollar-a-week reporter on the Enterprise.
Calloway's cablegram was handed to the managing editor at four o'clock in the
afternoon. He read it three times; and then drew a pocket mirror from a
pigeon-hole in his desk, and looked at his reflection carefully. Then he went
over to the desk of Boyd, his assistant (he usually called Boyd when he
wanted him), and laid the cablegram before him.
"It's from Calloway," he said. "See what you make of it."
The message was dated at Wi-ju, and these were the words of it:
Foregone preconcerted rash witching goes muffled rumour mine dark silent
unfortunate richmond existing great hotly brute select mooted parlous beggars
ye angel incontrovertible.
Boyd read it twice.
"It's either a cipher or a sunstroke," said he.
"Ever hear of anything like a code in the office—a secret code?" asked the m.
e., who had held his desk for only two years. Managing editors come and go.
"None except the vernacular that the lady specials write in," said Boyd.
"Couldn't be an acrostic, could it?"
"I thought of that," said the m. e., "but the beginning letters contain only four
vowels. It must be a code of some sort."
"Try em in groups," suggested Boyd. "Let's see—'Rash witching goes'—not
with me it doesn't. 'Muffled rumour mine'—must have an underground wire.
'Dark silent unfortunate richmond'—no reason why he should knock that town
so hard. 'Existing great hotly'—no it doesn't pan out. I'll call Scott."
The city editor came in a hurry, and tried his luck. A city editor must know
something about everything; so Scott knew a little about cipher-writing.
"It may be what is called an inverted alphabet cipher," said he. "I'll try that. 'R'
seems to be the oftenest used initial letter, with the exception of 'm.' Assuming
'r' to mean 'e', the most frequently used vowel, we transpose the letters—so."
Scott worked rapidly with his pencil for two minutes; and then showed the
first word according to his reading—the word "Scejtzez."
"Great!" cried Boyd. "It's a charade. My first is a Russian general. Go on,

Scott."
"No, that won't work," said the city editor. "It's undoubtedly a code. It's
impossible to read it without the key. Has the office ever used a cipher code?"
"Just what I was asking," said the m.e. "Hustle everybody up that ought to
know. We must get at it some way. Calloway has evidently got hold of
something big, and the censor has put the screws on, or he wouldn't have
cabled in a lot of chop suey like this."
Throughout the office of the Enterprise a dragnet was sent, hauling in such
members of the staff as would be likely to know of a code, past or present, by
reason of their wisdom, information, natural intelligence, or length of
servitude. They got together in a group in the city room, with the m. e. in the
centre. No one had heard of a code. All began to explain to the head
investigator that newspapers never use a code, anyhow—that is, a cipher code.
Of course the Associated Press stuff is a sort of code—an abbreviation, rather
—but—
The m. e. knew all that, and said so. He asked each man how long he had
worked on the paper. Not one of them had drawn pay from an Enterprise
envelope for longer than six years. Calloway had been on the paper twelve
years.
"Try old Heffelbauer," said the m. e. "He was here when Park Row was a
potato patch."
Heffelbauer was an institution. He was half janitor, half handy-man about the
office, and half watchman—thus becoming the peer of thirteen and one-half
tailors. Sent for, he came, radiating his nationality.
"Heffelbauer," said the m. e., "did you ever hear of a code belonging to the
office a long time ago—a private code? You know what a code is, don't you?"
"Yah," said Heffelbauer. "Sure I know vat a code is. Yah, apout dwelf or
fifteen year ago der office had a code. Der reborters in der city-room haf it
here."
"Ah!" said the m. e. "We're getting on the trail now. Where was it kept,
Heffelbauer? What do you know about it?"
"Somedimes," said the retainer, "dey keep it in der little room behind der
library room."
"Can you find it?" asked the m. e. eagerly. "Do you know where it is?"
"Mein Gott!" said Heffelbauer. "How long you dink a code live? Der reborters
call him a maskeet. But von day he butt mit his head der editor, und—"
"Oh, he's talking about a goat," said Boyd. "Get out, Heffelbauer."
Again discomfited, the concerted wit and resource of the Enterprise huddled

around Calloway's puzzle, considering its mysterious words in vain.
Then Vesey came in.
Vesey was the youngest reporter. He had a thirty-two-inch chest and wore a
number fourteen collar; but his bright Scotch plaid suit gave him presence and
conferred no obscurity upon his whereabouts. He wore his hat in such a
position that people followed him about to see him take it off, convinced that
it must be hung upon a peg driven into the back of his head. He was never
without an immense, knotted, hard-wood cane with a German-silver tip on its
crooked handle. Vesey was the best photograph hustler in the office. Scott said
it was because no living human being could resist the personal triumph it was
to hand his picture over to Vesey. Vesey always wrote his own news stories,
except the big ones, which were sent to the rewrite men. Add to this fact that
among all the inhabitants, temples, and groves of the earth nothing existed that
could abash Vesey, and his dim sketch is concluded.
Vesey butted into the circle of cipher readers very much as Heffelbauer's
"code" would have done, and asked what was up. Some one explained, with
the touch of half-familiar condescension that they always used toward him.
Vesey reached out and took the cablegram from the m. e.'s hand. Under the
protection of some special Providence, he was always doing appalling things
like that, and coming, off unscathed.
"It's a code," said Vesey. "Anybody got the key?"
"The office has no code," said Boyd, reaching for the message. Vesey held to
it.
"Then old Calloway expects us to read it, anyhow," said he. "He's up a tree, or
something, and he's made this up so as to get it by the censor. It's up to us.
Gee! I wish they had sent me, too. Say—we can't afford to fall down on our
end of it. 'Foregone, preconcerted rash, witching'—h'm."
Vesey sat down on a table corner and began to whistle softly, frowning at the
cablegram.
"Let's have it, please," said the m. e. "We've got to get to work on it."
"I believe I've got a line on it," said Vesey. "Give me ten minutes."
He walked to his desk, threw his hat into a waste-basket, spread out flat on his
chest like a gorgeous lizard, and started his pencil going. The wit and wisdom
of the Enterprise remained in a loose group, and smiled at one another,
nodding their heads toward Vesey. Then they began to exchange their theories
about the cipher.
It took Vesey exactly fifteen minutes. He brought to the m. e. a pad with the
code-key written on it.

"I felt the swing of it as soon as I saw it," said Vesey. "Hurrah for old
Calloway! He's done the Japs and every paper in town that prints literature
instead of news. Take a look at that."
Thus had Vesey set forth the reading of the code:
Foregone—conclusion
Preconcerted—arrangement
Rash—act
Witching—hour of midnight
Goes—without saying
Muffled—report
Rumour—hath it
Mine—host
Dark—horse
Silent—majority
Unfortunate—pedestrians
Richmond—in the field
Existing—conditions
Great—White Way
Hotly—contested
Brute—force
Select—few
Mooted—question
Parlous—times
Beggars—description
Ye—correspondent
Angel—unawares
Incontrovertible—fact
Mr. Vesey afterward explained that the logical journalistic complement of the
word "unfortunate" was once the word "victim." But, since the automobile
became so popular, the correct following word is now "pedestrians". Of
course, in Calloway's code it meant infantry.
"It's simply newspaper English," explained Vesey. "I've been reporting on the
Enterprise long enough to know it by heart. Old Calloway gives us the cue
word, and we use the word that naturally follows it just as we use 'em in the

paper. Read it over, and you'll see how pat they drop into their places. Now,
here's the message he intended us to get."
Vesey handed out another sheet of paper.
Concluded arrangement to act at hour of midnight without saying. Report hath
it that a large body of cavalry and an overwhelming force of infantry will be
thrown into the field. Conditions white. Way contested by only a small force.
Question the Times description. Its correspondent is unaware of the facts.
"Great stuff!" cried Boyd excitedly. "Kuroki crosses the Yalu to-night and
attacks. Oh, we won't do a thing to the sheets that make up with Addison's
essays, real estate transfers, and bowling scores!"
"Mr. Vesey," said the m. e., with his jollying-which-you-should-regard-as-afavour manner, "you have cast a serious reflection upon the literary standards
of the paper that employs you. You have also assisted materially in giving us
the biggest 'beat' of the year. I will let you know in a day or two whether you
are to be discharged or retained at a larger salary. Somebody send Ames to
me."
Ames was the king-pin, the snowy-petalled Marguerite, the star-bright looloo
of the rewrite men. He saw attempted murder in the pains of green-apple colic,
cyclones in the summer zephyr, lost children in every top-spinning urchin, an
uprising of the down-trodden masses in every hurling of a derelict potato at a
passing automobile. When not rewriting, Ames sat on the porch of his
Brooklyn villa playing checkers with his ten-year-old son.
Ames and the "war editor" shut themselves in a room. There was a map in
there stuck full of little pins that represented armies and divisions. Their
fingers had been itching for days to move those pins along the crooked line of
the Yalu. They did so now; and in words of fire Ames translated Calloway's
brief message into a front page masterpiece that set the world talking. He told
of the secret councils of the Japanese officers; gave Kuroki's flaming speeches
in full; counted the cavalry and infantry to a man and a horse; described the
quick and silent building, of the bridge at Suikauchen, across which the
Mikado's legions were hurled upon the surprised Zassulitch, whose troops
were widely scattered along the river. And the battle!—well, you know what
Ames can do with a battle if you give him just one smell of smoke for a
foundation. And in the same story, with seemingly supernatural knowledge, he
gleefully scored the most profound and ponderous paper in England for the
false and misleading account of the intended movements of the Japanese First
Army printed in its issue of the same date.
Only one error was made; and that was the fault of the cable operator at Wi-ju.
Calloway pointed it out after he came back. The word "great" in his code
should have been "gage," and its complemental words "of battle." But it went

to Ames "conditions white," and of course he took that to mean snow. His
description of the Japanese army struggling through the snowstorm, blinded
by the whirling flakes, was thrillingly vivid. The artists turned out some
effective illustrations that made a hit as pictures of the artillery dragging their
guns through the drifts. But, as the attack was made on the first day of May,
"conditions white" excited some amusement. But it in made no difference to
the Enterprise, anyway.
It was wonderful. And Calloway was wonderful in having made the new
censor believe that his jargon of words meant no more than a complaint of the
dearth of news and a petition for more expense money. And Vesey was
wonderful. And most wonderful of all are words, and how they make friends
one with another, being oft associated, until not even obituary notices them do
part.
On the second day following, the city editor halted at Vesey's desk where the
reporter was writing the story of a man who had broken his leg by falling into
a coal-hole—Ames having failed to find a murder motive in it.
"The old man says your salary is to be raised to twenty a week," said Scott.
"All right," said Vesey. "Every little helps. Say—Mr. Scott, which would you
say—'We can state without fear of successful contradiction,' or, 'On the whole
it can be safely asserted'?"

V
A MATTER OF MEAN ELEVATION
One winter the Alcazar Opera Company of New Orleans made a speculative
trip along the Mexican, Central American and South American coasts. The
venture proved a most successful one. The music-loving, impressionable
Spanish-Americans deluged the company with dollars and "vivas." The
manager waxed plump and amiable. But for the prohibitive climate he would
have put forth the distinctive flower of his prosperity—the overcoat of fur,
braided, frogged and opulent. Almost was he persuaded to raise the salaries of
his company. But with a mighty effort he conquered the impulse toward such
an unprofitable effervescence of joy.
At Macuto, on the coast of Venezuela, the company scored its greatest success.
Imagine Coney Island translated into Spanish and you will comprehend
Macuto. The fashionable season is from November to March. Down from La
Guayra and Caracas and Valencia and other interior towns flock the people for
their holiday season. There are bathing and fiestas and bull fights and scandal.
And then the people have a passion for music that the bands in the plaza and

on the sea beach stir but do not satisfy. The coming of the Alcazar Opera
Company aroused the utmost ardour and zeal among the pleasure seekers.
The illustrious Guzman Blanco, President and Dictator of Venezuela,
sojourned in Macuto with his court for the season. That potent ruler—who
himself paid a subsidy of 40,000 pesos each year to grand opera in Caracas—
ordered one of the Government warehouses to be cleared for a temporary
theatre. A stage was quickly constructed and rough wooden benches made for
the audience. Private boxes were added for the use of the President and the
notables of the army and Government.
The company remained in Macuto for two weeks. Each performance filled the
house as closely as it could be packed. Then the music-mad people fought for
room in the open doors and windows, and crowded about, hundreds deep, on
the outside. Those audiences formed a brilliantly diversified patch of colour.
The hue of their faces ranged from the clear olive of the pure-blood Spaniards
down through the yellow and brown shades of the Mestizos to the coal-black
Carib and the Jamaica Negro. Scattered among them were little groups of
Indians with faces like stone idols, wrapped in gaudy fibre-woven blankets—
Indians down from the mountain states of Zamora and Los Andes and Miranda
to trade their gold dust in the coast towns.
The spell cast upon these denizens of the interior fastnesses was remarkable.
They sat in petrified ecstasy, conspicuous among the excitable Macutians, who
wildly strove with tongue and hand to give evidence of their delight. Only
once did the sombre rapture of these aboriginals find expression. During the
rendition of "Faust," Guzman Blanco, extravagantly pleased by the "Jewel
Song," cast upon the stage a purse of gold pieces. Other distinguished citizens
followed his lead to the extent of whatever loose coin they had convenient,
while some of the fair and fashionable señoras were moved, in imitation, to
fling a jewel or a ring or two at the feet of the Marguerite—who was,
according to the bills, Mlle. Nina Giraud. Then, from different parts of the
house rose sundry of the stolid hillmen and cast upon the stage little brown
and dun bags that fell with soft "thumps" and did not rebound. It was, no
doubt, pleasure at the tribute to her art that caused Mlle. Giraud's eyes to shine
so brightly when she opened these little deerskin bags in her dressing room
and found them to contain pure gold dust. If so, the pleasure was rightly hers,
for her voice in song, pure, strong and thrilling with the feeling of the
emotional artist, deserved the tribute that it earned.
But the triumph of the Alcazar Opera Company is not the theme—it but leans
upon and colours it. There happened in Macuto a tragic thing, an unsolvable
mystery, that sobered for a time the gaiety of the happy season.
One evening between the short twilight and the time when she should have
whirled upon the stage in the red and black of the ardent Carmen, Mlle. Nina

Giraud disappeared from the sight and ken of 6,000 pairs of eyes and as many
minds in Macuto. There was the usual turmoil and hurrying to seek her.
Messengers flew to the little French-kept hotel where she stayed; others of the
company hastened here or there where she might be lingering in some tienda
or unduly prolonging her bath upon the beach. All search was fruitless.
Mademoiselle had vanished.
Half an hour passed and she did not appear. The dictator, unused to the
caprices of prime donne, became impatient. He sent an aide from his box to
say to the manager that if the curtain did not at once rise he would
immediately hale the entire company to the calabosa, though it would desolate
his heart, indeed, to be compelled to such an act. Birds in Macuto could be
made to sing.
The manager abandoned hope for the time of Mlle. Giraud. A member of the
chorus, who had dreamed hopelessly for years of the blessed opportunity,
quickly Carmenized herself and the opera went on.
Afterward, when the lost cantatrice appeared not, the aid of the authorities was
invoked. The President at once set the army, the police and all citizens to the
search. Not one clue to Mlle. Giraud's disappearance was found. The Alcazar
left to fill engagements farther down the coast.
On the way back the steamer stopped at Macuto and the manager made
anxious inquiry. Not a trace of the lady had been discovered. The Alcazar
could do no more. The personal belongings of the missing lady were stored in
the hotel against her possible later reappearance and the opera company
continued upon its homeward voyage to New Orleans.
On the camino real along the beach the two saddle mules and the four pack
mules of Don Señor Johnny Armstrong stood, patiently awaiting the crack of
the whip of the arriero, Luis. That would be the signal for the start on another
long journey into the mountains. The pack mules were loaded with a varied
assortment of hardware and cutlery. These articles Don Johnny traded to the
interior Indians for the gold dust that they washed from the Andean streams
and stored in quills and bags against his coming. It was a profitable business,
and Señor Armstrong expected soon to be able to purchase the coffee
plantation that he coveted.
Armstrong stood on the narrow sidewalk, exchanging garbled Spanish with
old Peralto, the rich native merchant who had just charged him four prices for
half a gross of pot-metal hatchets, and abridged English with Rucker, the little
German who was Consul for the United States.
"Take with you, señor," said Peralto, "the blessings of the saints upon your
journey."

"Better try quinine," growled Rucker through his pipe. "Take two grains every
night. And don't make your trip too long, Johnny, because we haf needs of
you. It is ein villainous game dot Melville play of whist, and dere is no oder
substitute. Auf wiedersehen, und keep your eyes dot mule's ears between when
you on der edge of der brecipices ride."
The bells of Luis's mule jingled and the pack train filed after the warning note.
Armstrong, waved a good-bye and took his place at the tail of the procession.
Up the narrow street they turned, and passed the two-story wooden Hotel
Ingles, where Ives and Dawson and Richards and the rest of the chaps were
dawdling on the broad piazza, reading week-old newspapers. They crowded to
the railing and shouted many friendly and wise and foolish farewells after him.
Across the plaza they trotted slowly past the bronze statue of Guzman Blanco,
within its fence of bayoneted rifles captured from revolutionists, and out of the
town between the rows of thatched huts swarming with the unclothed youth of
Macuto. They plunged into the damp coolness of banana groves at length to
emerge upon a bright stream, where brown women in scant raiment laundered
clothes destructively upon the rocks. Then the pack train, fording the stream,
attacked the sudden ascent, and bade adieu to such civilization as the coast
afforded.
For weeks Armstrong, guided by Luis, followed his regular route among the
mountains. After he had collected an arroba of the precious metal, winning a
profit of nearly $5,000, the heads of the lightened mules were turned downtrail again. Where the head of the Guarico River springs from a great gash in
the mountain-side, Luis halted the train.
"Half a day's journey from here, Señor," said he, "is the village of Tacuzama,
which we have never visited. I think many ounces of gold may be procured
there. It is worth the trial."
Armstrong concurred, and they turned again upward toward Tacuzama. The
trail was abrupt and precipitous, mounting through a dense forest. As night
fell, dark and gloomy, Luis once more halted. Before them was a black chasm,
bisecting the path as far as they could see.
Luis dismounted. "There should be a bridge," he called, and ran along the cleft
a distance. "It is here," he cried, and remounting, led the way. In a few
moments Armstrong, heard a sound as though a thunderous drum were beating
somewhere in the dark. It was the falling of the mules' hoofs upon the bridge
made of strong hides lashed to poles and stretched across the chasm. Half a
mile further was Tacuzama. The village was a congregation of rock and mud
huts set in the profundity of an obscure wood. As they rode in a sound
inconsistent with that brooding solitude met their ears. From a long, low mud
hut that they were nearing rose the glorious voice of a woman in song. The
words were English, the air familiar to Armstrong's memory, but not to his

musical knowledge.
He slipped from his mule and stole to a narrow window in one end of the
house. Peering cautiously inside, he saw, within three feet of him, a woman of
marvellous, imposing beauty, clothed in a splendid loose robe of leopard skins.
The hut was packed close to the small space in which she stood with the
squatting figures of Indians.
The woman finished her song and seated herself close to the little window, as
if grateful for the unpolluted air that entered it. When she had ceased several
of the audience rose and cast little softly-falling bags at her feet. A harsh
murmur—no doubt a barbarous kind of applause and comment—went through
the grim assembly.
Armstrong, was used to seizing opportunities promptly. Taking advantage of
the noise he called to the woman in a low but distinct voice: "Do not turn your
head this way, but listen. I am an American. If you need assistance tell me how
I can render it. Answer as briefly as you can."
The woman was worthy of his boldness. Only by a sudden flush of her pale
cheek did she acknowledge understanding of his words. Then she spoke,
scarcely moving her lips.
"I am held a prisoner by these Indians. God knows I need help. In two hours
come to the little hut twenty yards toward the Mountainside. There will be a
light and a red curtain in the window. There is always a guard at the door,
whom you will have to overcome. For the love of heaven, do not fail to
come."
The story seems to shrink from adventure and rescue and mystery. The theme
is one too gentle for those brave and quickening tones. And yet it reaches as
far back as time itself. It has been named "environment," which is as weak a
word as any to express the unnameable kinship of man to nature, that queer
fraternity that causes stones and trees and salt water and clouds to play upon
our emotions. Why are we made serious and solemn and sublime by mountain
heights, grave and contemplative by an abundance of overhanging trees,
reduced to inconstancy and monkey capers by the ripples on a sandy beach?
Did the protoplasm—but enough. The chemists are looking into the matter,
and before long they will have all life in the table of the symbols.
Briefly, then, in order to confine the story within scientific bounds, John
Armstrong, went to the hut, choked the Indian guard and carried away Mlle.
Giraud. With her was also conveyed a number of pounds of gold dust she had
collected during her six months' forced engagement in Tacuzama. The
Carabobo Indians are easily the most enthusiastic lovers of music between the
equator and the French Opera House in New Orleans. They are also strong
believers that the advice of Emerson was good when he said: "The thing thou

wantest, O discontented man —take it, and pay the price." A number of them
had attended the performance of the Alcazar Opera Company in Macuto, and
found Mlle. Giraud's style and technique satisfactory. They wanted her, so
they took her one evening suddenly and without any fuss. They treated her
with much consideration, exacting only one song recital each day. She was
quite pleased at being rescued by Mr. Armstrong. So much for mystery and
adventure. Now to resume the theory of the protoplasm.
John Armstrong and Mlle. Giraud rode among the Andean peaks, enveloped in
their greatness and sublimity. The mightiest cousins, furthest removed, in
nature's great family become conscious of the tie. Among those huge piles of
primordial upheaval, amid those gigantic silences and elongated fields of
distance the littlenesses of men are precipitated as one chemical throws down
a sediment from another. They moved reverently, as in a temple. Their souls
were uplifted in unison with the stately heights. They travelled in a zone of
majesty and peace.
To Armstrong the woman seemed almost a holy thing. Yet bathed in the white,
still dignity of her martyrdom that purified her earthly beauty and gave out, it
seemed, an aura of transcendent loveliness, in those first hours of
companionship she drew from him an adoration that was half human love, half
the worship of a descended goddess.
Never yet since her rescue had she smiled. Over her dress she still wore the
robe of leopard skins, for the mountain air was cold. She looked to be some
splendid princess belonging to those wild and awesome altitudes. The spirit of
the region chimed with hers. Her eyes were always turned upon the sombre
cliffs, the blue gorges and the snow-clad turrets, looking a sublime melancholy
equal to their own. At times on the journey she sang thrilling te deums and
misereres that struck the true note of the hills, and made their route seem like a
solemn march down a cathedral aisle. The rescued one spoke but seldom, her
mood partaking of the hush of nature that surrounded them. Armstrong looked
upon her as an angel. He could not bring himself to the sacrilege of attempting
to woo her as other women may be wooed.
On the third day they had descended as far as the tierra templada, the zona of
the table lands and foot hills. The mountains were receding in their rear, but
still towered, exhibiting yet impressively their formidable heads. Here they
met signs of man. They saw the white houses of coffee plantations gleam
across the clearings. They struck into a road where they met travellers and
pack-mules. Cattle were grazing on the slopes. They passed a little village
where the round-eyed niños shrieked and called at sight of them.
Mlle. Giraud laid aside her leopard-skin robe. It seemed to be a trifle
incongruous now. In the mountains it had appeared fitting and natural. And if
Armstrong was not mistaken she laid aside with it something of the high

dignity of her demeanour. As the country became more populous and
significant of comfortable life he saw, with a feeling of joy, that the exalted
princess and priestess of the Andean peaks was changing to a woman—an
earth woman, but no less enticing. A little colour crept to the surface of her
marble cheek. She arranged the conventional dress that the removal of the
robe now disclosed with the solicitous touch of one who is conscious of the
eyes of others. She smoothed the careless sweep of her hair. A mundane
interest, long latent in the chilling atmosphere of the ascetic peaks, showed in
her eyes.
This thaw in his divinity sent Armstrong's heart going faster. So might an
Arctic explorer thrill at his first ken of green fields and liquescent waters.
They were on a lower plane of earth and life and were succumbing to its
peculiar, subtle influence. The austerity of the hills no longer thinned the air
they breathed. About them was the breath of fruit and corn and builded homes,
the comfortable smell of smoke and warm earth and the consolations man has
placed between himself and the dust of his brother earth from which he
sprung. While traversing those awful mountains, Mile. Giraud had seemed to
be wrapped in their spirit of reverent reserve. Was this that same woman—
now palpitating, warm, eager, throbbing with conscious life and charm,
feminine to her finger-tips? Pondering over this, Armstrong felt certain
misgivings intrude upon his thoughts. He wished he could stop there with this
changing creature, descending no farther. Here was the elevation and
environment to which her nature seemed to respond with its best. He feared to
go down upon the man-dominated levels. Would her spirit not yield still
further in that artificial zone to which they were descending?
Now from a little plateau they saw the sea flash at the edge of the green
lowlands. Mile. Giraud gave a little, catching sigh.
"Oh! look, Mr. Armstrong, there is the sea! Isn't it lovely? I'm so tired of
mountains." She heaved a pretty shoulder in a gesture of repugnance. "Those
horrid Indians! Just think of what I suffered! Although I suppose I attained my
ambition of becoming a stellar attraction, I wouldn't care to repeat the
engagement. It was very nice of you to bring me away. Tell me, Mr.
Armstrong—honestly, now —do I look such an awful, awful fright? I haven't
looked into a mirror, you know, for months."
Armstrong made answer according to his changed moods. Also he laid his
hand upon hers as it rested upon the horn of her saddle. Luis was at the head of
the pack train and could not see. She allowed it to remain there, and her eyes
smiled frankly into his.
Then at sundown they dropped upon the coast level under the palms and
lemons among the vivid greens and scarlets and ochres of the tierra caliente.
They rode into Macuto, and saw the line of volatile bathers frolicking in the

surf. The mountains were very far away.
Mlle. Giraud's eyes were shining with a joy that could not have existed under
the chaperonage of the mountain-tops. There were other spirits calling to her
—nymphs of the orange groves, pixies from the chattering surf, imps, born of
the music, the perfumes, colours and the insinuating presence of humanity.
She laughed aloud, musically, at a sudden thought.
"Won't there be a sensation?" she called to Armstrong. "Don't I wish I had an
engagement just now, though! What a picnic the press agent would have!
'Held a prisoner by a band of savage Indians subdued by the spell of her
wonderful voice'—wouldn't that make great stuff? But I guess I quit the game
winner, anyhow—there ought to be a couple of thousand dollars in that sack of
gold dust I collected as encores, don't you think?"
He left her at the door of the little Hotel de Buen Descansar, where she had
stopped before. Two hours later he returned to the hotel. He glanced in at the
open door of the little combined reception room and cafe.
Half a dozen of Macuto's representative social and official caballeros were
distributed about the room. Señor Villablanca, the wealthy rubber
concessionist, reposed his fat figure on two chairs, with an emollient smile
beaming upon his chocolate-coloured face. Guilbert, the French mining
engineer, leered through his polished nose-glasses. Colonel Mendez, of the
regular army, in gold-laced uniform and fatuous grin, was busily extracting
corks from champagne bottles. Other patterns of Macutian gallantry and
fashion pranced and posed. The air was hazy with cigarette smoke. Wine
dripped upon the floor.
Perched upon a table in the centre of the room in an attitude of easy
preëminence was Mlle. Giraud. A chic costume of white lawn and cherry
ribbons supplanted her travelling garb. There was a suggestion of lace, and a
frill or two, with a discreet, small implication of hand-embroidered pink
hosiery. Upon her lap rested a guitar. In her face was the light of resurrection,
the peace of elysium attained through fire and suffering. She was singing to a
lively accompaniment a little song:
"When you see de big round moon
Comin' up like a balloon,
Dis nigger skips fur to kiss de lips
Ob his stylish, black-faced coon."
The singer caught sight of Armstrong.
"Hi! there, Johnny," she called; "I've been expecting you for an hour. What
kept you? Gee! but these smoked guys are the slowest you ever saw. They ain't
on, at all. Come along in, and I'll make this coffee-coloured old sport with the

gold epaulettes open one for you right off the ice."
"Thank you," said Armstrong; "not just now, I believe. I've several things to
attend to."
He walked out and down the street, and met Rucker coming up from the
Consulate.
"Play you a game of billiards," said Armstrong. "I want something to take the
taste of the sea level out of my mouth."

VI
"GIRL"
In gilt letters on the ground glass of the door of room No. 962 were the words:
"Robbins & Hartley, Brokers." The clerks had gone. It was past five, and with
the solid tramp of a drove of prize Percherons, scrub-women were invading
the cloud-capped twenty-story office building. A puff of red-hot air flavoured
with lemon peelings, soft-coal smoke and train oil came in through the halfopen windows.
Robbins, fifty, something of an overweight beau, and addicted to first nights
and hotel palm-rooms, pretended to be envious of his partner's commuter's
joys.
"Going to be something doing in the humidity line to-night," he said. "You
out-of-town chaps will be the people, with your katydids and moonlight and
long drinks and things out on the front porch."
Hartley, twenty-nine, serious, thin, good-looking, nervous, sighed and frowned
a little.
"Yes," said he, "we always have cool nights in Floralhurst, especially in the
winter."
A man with an air of mystery came in the door and went up to Hartley.
"I've found where she lives," he announced in the portentous half-whisper that
makes the detective at work a marked being to his fellow men.
Hartley scowled him into a state of dramatic silence and quietude. But by that
time Robbins had got his cane and set his tie pin to his liking, and with a
debonair nod went out to his metropolitan amusements.
"Here is the address," said the detective in a natural tone, being deprived of an
audience to foil.
Hartley took the leaf torn out of the sleuth's dingy memorandum book. On it

were pencilled the words "Vivienne Arlington, No. 341 East ––––th Street,
care of Mrs. McComus."
"Moved there a week ago," said the detective. "Now, if you want any
shadowing done, Mr. Hartley, I can do you as fine a job in that line as anybody
in the city. It will be only $7 a day and expenses. Can send in a daily
typewritten report, covering—"
"You needn't go on," interrupted the broker. "It isn't a case of that kind. I
merely wanted the address. How much shall I pay you?"
"One day's work," said the sleuth. "A tenner will cover it."
Hartley paid the man and dismissed him. Then he left the office and boarded a
Broadway car. At the first large crosstown artery of travel he took an
eastbound car that deposited him in a decaying avenue, whose ancient
structures once sheltered the pride and glory of the town.
Walking a few squares, he came to the building that he sought. It was a new
flathouse, bearing carved upon its cheap stone portal its sonorous name, "The
Vallambrosa." Fire-escapes zigzagged down its front—these laden with
household goods, drying clothes, and squalling children evicted by the
midsummer heat. Here and there a pale rubber plant peeped from the
miscellaneous mass, as if wondering to what kingdom it belonged—vegetable,
animal or artificial.
Hartley pressed the "McComus" button. The door latch clicked spasmodically
—now hospitably, now doubtfully, as though in anxiety whether it might be
admitting friends or duns. Hartley entered and began to climb the stairs after
the manner of those who seek their friends in city flat-houses—which is the
manner of a boy who climbs an apple-tree, stopping when he comes upon
what he wants.
On the fourth floor he saw Vivienne standing in an open door. She invited him
inside, with a nod and a bright, genuine smile. She placed a chair for him near
a window, and poised herself gracefully upon the edge of one of those Jekylland-Hyde pieces of furniture that are masked and mysteriously hooded,
unguessable bulks by day and inquisitorial racks of torture by night.
Hartley cast a quick, critical, appreciative glance at her before speaking, and
told himself that his taste in choosing had been flawless.
Vivienne was about twenty-one. She was of the purest Saxon type. Her hair
was a ruddy golden, each filament of the neatly gathered mass shining with its
own lustre and delicate graduation of colour. In perfect harmony were her
ivory-clear complexion and deep sea-blue eyes that looked upon the world
with the ingenuous calmness of a mermaid or the pixie of an undiscovered
mountain stream. Her frame was strong and yet possessed the grace of

absolute naturalness. And yet with all her Northern clearness and frankness of
line and colouring, there seemed to be something of the tropics in her—
something of languor in the droop of her pose, of love of ease in her ingenious
complacency of satisfaction and comfort in the mere act of breathing—
something that seemed to claim for her a right as a perfect work of nature to
exist and be admired equally with a rare flower or some beautiful, milk-white
dove among its sober-hued companions.
She was dressed in a white waist and dark skirt—that discreet masquerade of
goose-girl and duchess.
"Vivienne," said Hartley, looking at her pleadingly, "you did not answer my
last letter. It was only by nearly a week's search that I found where you had
moved to. Why have you kept me in suspense when you knew how anxiously
I was waiting to see you and hear from you?"
The girl looked out the window dreamily.
"Mr. Hartley," she said hesitatingly, "I hardly know what to say to you. I
realize all the advantages of your offer, and sometimes I feel sure that I could
be contented with you. But, again, I am doubtful. I was born a city girl, and I
am afraid to bind myself to a quiet suburban life."
"My dear girl," said Hartley, ardently, "have I not told you that you shall have
everything that your heart can desire that is in my power to give you? You
shall come to the city for the theatres, for shopping and to visit your friends as
often as you care to. You can trust me, can you not?"
"To the fullest," she said, turning her frank eyes upon him with a smile. "I
know you are the kindest of men, and that the girl you get will be a lucky one.
I learned all about you when I was at the Montgomerys'."
"Ah!" exclaimed Hartley, with a tender, reminiscent light in his eye; "I
remember well the evening I first saw you at the Montgomerys'. Mrs.
Montgomery was sounding your praises to me all the evening. And she hardly
did you justice. I shall never forget that supper. Come, Vivienne, promise me. I
want you. You'll never regret coming with me. No one else will ever give you
as pleasant a home."
The girl sighed and looked down at her folded hands.
A sudden jealous suspicion seized Hartley.
"Tell me, Vivienne," he asked, regarding her keenly, "is there another—is there
some one else ?"
A rosy flush crept slowly over her fair cheeks and neck.
"You shouldn't ask that, Mr. Hartley," she said, in some confusion. "But I will
tell you. There is one other—but he has no right—I have promised him

nothing."
"His name?" demanded Hartley, sternly.
"Townsend."
"Rafford Townsend!" exclaimed Hartley, with a grim tightening of his jaw.
"How did that man come to know you? After all I've done for him—"
"His auto has just stopped below," said Vivienne, bending over the windowsill. "He's coming for his answer. Oh I don't know what to do!"
The bell in the flat kitchen whirred. Vivienne hurried to press the latch button.
"Stay here," said Hartley. "I will meet him in the hall."
Townsend, looking like a Spanish grandee in his light tweeds, Panama hat and
curling black mustache, came up the stairs three at a time. He stopped at sight
of Hartley and looked foolish.
"Go back," said Hartley, firmly, pointing downstairs with his forefinger.
"Hullo!" said Townsend, feigning surprise. "What's up? What are you doing
here, old man?"
"Go back," repeated Hartley, inflexibly. "The Law of the Jungle. Do you want
the Pack to tear you in pieces? The kill is mine."
"I came here to see a plumber about the bathroom connections," said
Townsend, bravely.
"All right," said Hartley. "You shall have that lying plaster to stick upon your
traitorous soul. But, go back." Townsend went downstairs, leaving a bitter
word to be wafted up the draught of the staircase. Hartley went back to his
wooing.
"Vivienne," said he, masterfully. "I have got to have you. I will take no more
refusals or dilly-dallying."
"When do you want me?" she asked.
"Now. As soon as you can get ready."
She stood calmly before him and looked him in the eye.
"Do you think for one moment," she said, "that I would enter your home while
Héloise is there?"
Hartley cringed as if from an unexpected blow. He folded his arms and paced
the carpet once or twice.
"She shall go," he declared grimly. Drops stood upon his brow. "Why should I
let that woman make my life miserable? Never have I seen one day of freedom
from trouble since I have known her. You are right, Vivienne. Héloise must be
sent away before I can take you home. But she shall go. I have decided. I will

turn her from my doors."
"When will you do this?" asked the girl.
Hartley clinched his teeth and bent his brows together.
"To-night," he said, resolutely. "I will send her away to-night."
"Then," said Vivienne, "my answer is 'yes.' Come for me when you will."
She looked into his eyes with a sweet, sincere light in her own. Hartley could
scarcely believe that her surrender was true, it was so swift and complete.
"Promise me," he said feelingly, "on your word and honour."
"On my word and honour," repeated Vivienne, softly.
At the door he turned and gazed at her happily, but yet as one who scarcely
trusts the foundations of his joy.
"To-morrow," he said, with a forefinger of reminder uplifted.
"To-morrow," she repeated with a smile of truth and candour.
In an hour and forty minutes Hartley stepped off the train at Floralhurst. A
brisk walk of ten minutes brought him to the gate of a handsome two-story
cottage set upon a wide and well-tended lawn. Halfway to the house he was
met by a woman with jet-black braided hair and flowing white summer gown,
who half strangled him without apparent cause.
When they stepped into the hall she said:
"Mamma's here. The auto is coming for her in half an hour. She came to
dinner, but there's no dinner."
"I've something to tell you," said Hartley. "I thought to break it to you gently,
but since your mother is here we may as well out with it."
He stooped and whispered something at her ear.
His wife screamed. Her mother came running into the hall. The dark-haired
woman screamed again—the joyful scream of a well-beloved and petted
woman.
"Oh, mamma!" she cried ecstatically, "what do you think? Vivienne is coming
to cook for us! She is the one that stayed with the Montgomerys a whole year.
And now, Billy, dear," she concluded, "you must go right down into the
kitchen and discharge Héloise. She has been drunk again the whole day long."

VII
SOCIOLOGY IN SERGE AND STRAW

The season of irresponsibility is at hand. Come, let us twine round our brows
wreaths of poison ivy (that is for idiocy), and wander hand in hand with
sociology in the summer fields.
Likely as not the world is flat. The wise men have tried to prove that it is
round, with indifferent success. They pointed out to us a ship going to sea, and
bade us observe that, at length, the convexity of the earth hid from our view all
but the vessel's topmast. But we picked up a telescope and looked, and saw the
decks and hull again. Then the wise men said: "Oh, pshaw! anyhow, the
variation of the intersection of the equator and the ecliptic proves it." We could
not see this through our telescope, so we remained silent. But it stands to
reason that, if the world were round, the queues of Chinamen would stand
straight up from their heads instead of hanging down their backs, as travellers
assure us they do.
Another hot-weather corroboration of the flat theory is the fact that all of life,
as we know it, moves in little, unavailing circles. More justly than to anything
else, it can be likened to the game of baseball. Crack! we hit the ball, and
away we go. If we earn a run (in life we call it success) we get back to the
home plate and sit upon a bench. If we are thrown out, we walk back to the
home plate—and sit upon a bench.
The circumnavigators of the alleged globe may have sailed the rim of a watery
circle back to the same port again. The truly great return at the high tide of
their attainments to the simplicity of a child. The billionaire sits down at his
mahogany to his bowl of bread and milk. When you reach the end of your
career, just take down the sign "Goal" and look at the other side of it. You will
find "Beginning Point" there. It has been reversed while you were going
around the track.
But this is humour, and must be stopped. Let us get back to the serious
questions that arise whenever Sociology turns summer boarder. You are
invited to consider the scene of the story—wild, Atlantic waves, thundering
against a wooded and rock-bound shore—in the Greater City of New York.
The town of Fishampton, on the south shore of Long Island, is noted for its
clam fritters and the summer residence of the Van Plushvelts.
The Van Plushvelts have a hundred million dollars, and their name is a
household word with tradesmen and photographers.
On the fifteenth of June the Van Plushvelts boarded up the front door of their
city house, carefully deposited their cat on the sidewalk, instructed the
caretaker not to allow it to eat any of the ivy on the walls, and whizzed away
in a 40-horse-power to Fishampton to stray alone in the shade—Amaryllis not
being in their class. If you are a subscriber to the Toadies' Magazine, you have
often—You say you are not? Well, you buy it at a news-stand, thinking that the

newsdealer is not wise to you. But he knows about it all. HE knows—HE
knows! I say that you have often seen in the Toadies' Magazine pictures of the
Van Plushvelts' summer home; so it will not be described here. Our business is
with young Haywood Van Plushvelt, sixteen years old, heir to the century of
millions, darling of the financial gods and great grandson of Peter Van
Plushvelt, former owner of a particularly fine cabbage patch that has been
ruined by an intrusive lot of downtown skyscrapers.
One afternoon young Haywood Van Plushvelt strolled out between the granite
gate posts of "Dolce far Niente"—that's what they called the place; and it was
an improvement on dolce Far Rockaway, I can tell you.
Haywood walked down into the village. He was human, after all, and his
prospective millions weighed upon him. Wealth had wreaked upon him its
direfullest. He was the product of private tutors. Even under his first hobbyhorse had tan bark been strewn. He had been born with a gold spoon, lobster
fork and fish-set in his mouth. For which I hope, later, to submit justification, I
must ask your consideration of his haberdashery and tailoring.
Young Fortunatus was dressed in a neat suit of dark blue serge, a neat, white
straw hat, neat low-cut tan shoes, of the well-known "immaculate" trade mark,
a neat, narrow four-in-hand tie, and carried a slender, neat, bamboo cane.
Down Persimmon Street (there's never tree north of Hagerstown, Md.) came
from the village "Smoky" Dodson, fifteen and a half, worst boy in
Fishampton. "Smoky" was dressed in a ragged red sweater, wrecked and
weather-worn golf cap, run-over shoes, and trousers of the "serviceable"
brand. Dust, clinging to the moisture induced by free exercise, darkened wide
areas of his face. "Smoky" carried a baseball bat, and a league ball that
advertised itself in the rotundity of his trousers pocket. Haywood stopped and
passed the time of day.
"Going to play ball?" he asked.
"Smoky's" eyes and countenance confronted him with a frank blue-andfreckled scrutiny.
"Me?" he said, with deadly mildness; "sure not. Can't you see I've got a divin'
suit on? I'm goin' up in a submarine balloon to catch butterflies with a twoinch auger.
"Excuse me," said Haywood, with the insulting politeness of his caste, "for
mistaking you for a gentleman. I might have known better."
"How might you have known better if you thought I was one?" said "Smoky,"
unconsciously a logician.
"By your appearance," said Haywood. "No gentleman is dirty, ragged and a
liar."

"Smoky" hooted once like a ferry-boat, spat on his hand, got a firm grip on his
baseball bat and then dropped it against the fence.
"Say," said he, "I knows you. You're the pup that belongs in that swell private
summer sanitarium for city-guys over there. I seen you come out of the gate.
You can't bluff nobody because you're rich. And because you got on swell
clothes. Arabella! Yah!"
"Ragamuffin!" said Haywood.
"Smoky" picked up a fence-rail splinter and laid it on his shoulder.
"Dare you to knock it off," he challenged.
"I wouldn't soil my hands with you," said the aristocrat.
"'Fraid," said "Smoky" concisely. "Youse city-ducks ain't got the I sand. I kin
lick you with one-hand."
"I don't wish to have any trouble with you," said Haywood. "I asked you a
civil question; and you replied, like a—like a—a cad."
"Wot's a cad?" asked "Smoky."
"A cad is a disagreeable person," answered Haywood, "who lacks manners and
doesn't know his place. They sometimes play baseball."
"I can tell you what a mollycoddle is," said "Smoky." "It's a monkey dressed
up by its mother and sent out to pick daisies on the lawn."
"When you have the honour to refer to the members of my family," said
Haywood, with some dim ideas of a code in his mind, "you'd better leave the
ladies out of your remarks."
"Ho! ladies!" mocked the rude one. "I say ladies! I know what them rich
women in the city does. They, drink cocktails and swear and give parties to
gorillas. The papers say so."
Then Haywood knew that it must be. He took off his coat, folded it neatly and
laid it on the roadside grass, placed his hat upon it and began to unknot his
blue silk tie.
"Hadn't yer better ring fer yer maid, Arabella?" taunted "Smoky." "Wot yer
going to do—go to bed?"
"I'm going to give you a good trouncing," said the hero. He did not hesitate,
although the enemy was far beneath him socially. He remembered that his
father once thrashed a cabman, and the papers gave it two columns, first page.
And the Toadies' Magazine had a special article on Upper Cuts by the Upper
Classes, and ran new pictures of the Van Plushvelt country seat, at
Fishampton.
"Wot's trouncing?" asked "Smoky," suspiciously. "I don't want your old

clothes. I'm no—oh, you mean to scrap! My, my! I won't do a thing to
mamma's pet. Criminy! I'd hate to be a hand-laundered thing like you.
"Smoky" waited with some awkwardness for his adversary to prepare for
battle. His own decks were always clear for action. When he should spit upon
the palm of his terrible right it was equivalent to "You may fire now, Gridley."
The hated patrician advanced, with his shirt sleeves neatly rolled up. "Smoky"
waited, in an attitude of ease, expecting the affair to be conducted according to
Fishampton's rules of war. These allowed combat to be prefaced by stigma,
recrimination, epithet, abuse and insult gradually increasing in emphasis and
degree. After a round of these "you're anothers" would come the chip knocked
from the shoulder, or the advance across the "dare" line drawn with a toe on
the ground. Next light taps given and taken, these also increasing in force until
finally the blood was up and fists going at their best.
But Haywood did not know Fishampton's rules. Noblesse oblige kept a faint
smile on his face as he walked slowly up to "Smoky" and said:
"Going to play ball?"
"Smoky" quickly understood this to be a putting of the previous question,
giving him the chance to make practical apology by answering it with civility
and relevance.
"Listen this time," said he. "I'm goin' skatin' on the river. Don't you see me
automobile with Chinese lanterns on it standin' and waitin' for me?"
Haywood knocked him down.
"Smoky" felt wronged. To thus deprive him of preliminary wrangle and
objurgation was to send an armoured knight full tilt against a crashing lance
without permitting him first to caracole around the list to the flourish of
trumpets. But he scrambled up and fell upon his foe, head, feet and fists.
The fight lasted one round of an hour and ten minutes. It was lengthened until
it was more like a war or a family feud than a fight. Haywood had learned
some of the science of boxing and wrestling from his tutors, but these he
discarded for the more instinctive methods of battle handed down by the cavedwelling Van Plushvelts.
So, when he found himself, during the mêlée, seated upon the kicking and
roaring "Smoky's" chest, he improved the opportunity by vigorously kneading
handfuls of sand and soil into his adversary's ears, eyes and mouth, and when
"Smoky" got the proper leg hold and "turned" him, he fastened both hands in
the Plushvelt hair and pounded the Plushvelt head against the lap of mother
earth. Of course, the strife was not incessantly active. There were seasons
when one sat upon the other, holding him down, while each blew like a
grampus, spat out the more inconveniently large sections of gravel and earth,

and strove to subdue the spirit of his opponent with a frightful and soulparalyzing glare.
At last, it seemed that in the language of the ring, their efforts lacked steam.
They broke away, and each disappeared in a cloud as he brushed away the dust
of the conflict. As soon as his breath permitted, Haywood walked close to
"Smoky" and said:
"Going to play ball?"
"Smoky" looked pensively at the sky, at his bat lying on the ground, and at the
"leaguer" rounding his pocket.
"Sure," he said, offhandedly. "The 'Yellowjackets' plays the 'Long Islands.' I'm
cap'n of the 'Long Islands.'"
"I guess I didn't mean to say you were ragged," said Haywood. "But you are
dirty, you know."
"Sure," said "Smoky." "Yer get that way knockin' around. Say, I don't believe
them New York papers about ladies drinkin' and havin' monkeys dinin' at the
table with 'em. I guess they're lies, like they print about people eatin' out of
silver plates, and ownin' dogs that cost $100."
"Certainly," said Haywood. "What do you play on your team?"
"Ketcher. Ever play any?"
"Never in my life," said Haywood. "I've never known any fellows except one
or two of my cousins."
"Jer like to learn? We're goin' to have a practice-game before the match.
Wanter come along? I'll put yer in left-field, and yer won't be long ketchin'
on."
"I'd like it bully," said Haywood. "I've always wanted to play baseball."
The ladies' maids of New York and the families of Western mine owners with
social ambitions will remember well the sensation that was created by the
report that the young multi-millionaire, Haywood Van Plushvelt, was playing
ball with the village youths of Fishampton. It was conceded that the
millennium of democracy had come. Reporters and photographers swarmed to
the island. The papers printed half-page pictures of him as short-stop stopping
a hot grounder. The Toadies' Magazine got out a Bat and Ball number that
covered the subject historically, beginning with the vampire bat and ending
with the Patriarchs' ball—illustrated with interior views of the Van Plushvelt
country seat. Ministers, educators and sociologists everywhere hailed the
event as the tocsin call that proclaimed the universal brotherhood of man.
One afternoon I was reclining under the trees near the shore at Fishampton in
the esteemed company of an eminent, bald-headed young sociologist. By way

of note it may be inserted that all sociologists are more or less bald, and
exactly thirty-two. Look 'em over.
The sociologist was citing the Van Plushvelt case as the most important
"uplift" symptom of a generation, and as an excuse for his own existence.
Immediately before us were the village baseball grounds. And now came the
sportive youth of Fishampton and distributed themselves, shouting, about the
diamond.
"There," said the sociologist, pointing, "there is young Van Plushvelt."
I raised myself (so far a cosycophant with Mary Ann) and gazed.
Young Van Plushvelt sat upon the ground. He was dressed in a ragged red
sweater, wrecked and weather-worn golf cap, run-over shoes, and trousers of
the "serviceable" brand. Dust clinging to the moisture induced by free
exercise, darkened wide areas of his face.
"That is he," repeated the sociologist. If he had said "him" I could have been
less vindictive.
On a bench, with an air, sat the young millionaire's chum.
He was dressed in a neat suit of dark blue serge, a neat white straw hat, neat
low-cut tan shoes, linen of the well-known "immaculate" trade mark, a neat,
narrow four-in-hand tie, and carried a slender, neat bamboo cane.
I laughed loudly and vulgarly.
"What you want to do," said I to the sociologist, "is to establish a reformatory
for the Logical Vicious Circle. Or else I've got wheels. It looks to me as if
things are running round and round in circles instead of getting anywhere."
"What do you mean?" asked the man of progress.
"Why, look what he has done to 'Smoky'," I replied.
"You will always be a fool," said my friend, the sociologist, getting up and
walking away.

VIII
THE RANSOM OF RED CHIEF
It looked like a good thing: but wait till I tell you. We were down South, in
Alabama—Bill Driscoll and myself—when this kidnapping idea struck us. It
was, as Bill afterward expressed it, "during a moment of temporary mental
apparition"; but we didn't find that out till later.
There was a town down there, as flat as a flannel-cake, and called Summit, of

course. It contained inhabitants of as undeleterious and self-satisfied a class of
peasantry as ever clustered around a Maypole.
Bill and me had a joint capital of about six hundred dollars, and we needed
just two thousand dollars more to pull off a fraudulent town-lot scheme in
Western Illinois with. We talked it over on the front steps of the hotel.
Philoprogenitiveness, says we, is strong in semi-rural communities; therefore
and for other reasons, a kidnapping project ought to do better there than in the
radius of newspapers that send reporters out in plain clothes to stir up talk
about such things. We knew that Summit couldn't get after us with anything
stronger than constables and maybe some lackadaisical bloodhounds and a
diatribe or two in the Weekly Farmers' Budget. So, it looked good.
We selected for our victim the only child of a prominent citizen named
Ebenezer Dorset. The father was respectable and tight, a mortgage fancier and
a stern, upright collection-plate passer and forecloser. The kid was a boy of
ten, with bas-relief freckles, and hair the colour of the cover of the magazine
you buy at the news-stand when you want to catch a train. Bill and me figured
that Ebenezer would melt down for a ransom of two thousand dollars to a cent.
But wait till I tell you.
About two miles from Summit was a little mountain, covered with a dense
cedar brake. On the rear elevation of this mountain was a cave. There we
stored provisions. One evening after sundown, we drove in a buggy past old
Dorset's house. The kid was in the street, throwing rocks at a kitten on the
opposite fence.
"Hey, little boy!" says Bill, "would you like to have a bag of candy and a nice
ride?"
The boy catches Bill neatly in the eye with a piece of brick.
"That will cost the old man an extra five hundred dollars," says Bill, climbing
over the wheel.
That boy put up a fight like a welter-weight cinnamon bear; but, at last, we got
him down in the bottom of the buggy and drove away. We took him up to the
cave and I hitched the horse in the cedar brake. After dark I drove the buggy to
the little village, three miles away, where we had hired it, and walked back to
the mountain.
Bill was pasting court-plaster over the scratches and bruises on his features.
There was a fire burning behind the big rock at the entrance of the cave, and
the boy was watching a pot of boiling coffee, with two buzzard tail-feathers
stuck in his red hair. He points a stick at me when I come up, and says:
"Ha! cursed paleface, do you dare to enter the camp of Red Chief, the terror of
the plains?

"He's all right now," says Bill, rolling up his trousers and examining some
bruises on his shins. "We're playing Indian. We're making Buffalo Bill's show
look like magic-lantern views of Palestine in the town hall. I'm Old Hank, the
Trapper, Red Chief's captive, and I'm to be scalped at daybreak. By Geronimo!
that kid can kick hard."
Yes, sir, that boy seemed to be having the time of his life. The fun of camping
out in a cave had made him forget that he was a captive himself. He
immediately christened me Snake-eye, the Spy, and announced that, when his
braves returned from the warpath, I was to be broiled at the stake at the rising
of the sun.
Then we had supper; and he filled his mouth full of bacon and bread and
gravy, and began to talk. He made a during-dinner speech something like this:
"I like this fine. I never camped out before; but I had a pet 'possum once, and I
was nine last birthday. I hate to go to school. Rats ate up sixteen of Jimmy
Talbot's aunt's speckled hen's eggs. Are there any real Indians in these woods?
I want some more gravy. Does the trees moving make the wind blow? We had
five puppies. What makes your nose so red, Hank? My father has lots of
money. Are the stars hot? I whipped Ed Walker twice, Saturday. I don't like
girls. You dassent catch toads unless with a string. Do oxen make any noise?
Why are oranges round? Have you got beds to sleep on in this cave? Amos
Murray has got six toes. A parrot can talk, but a monkey or a fish can't. How
many does it take to make twelve?"
Every few minutes he would remember that he was a pesky redskin, and pick
up his stick rifle and tiptoe to the mouth of the cave to rubber for the scouts of
the hated paleface. Now and then he would let out a war-whoop that made Old
Hank the Trapper shiver. That boy had Bill terrorized from the start.
"Red Chief," says I to the kid, "would you like to go home?"
"Aw, what for?" says he. "I don't have any fun at home. I hate to go to school.
I like to camp out. You won't take me back home again, Snake-eye, will you?"
"Not right away," says I. "We'll stay here in the cave a while."
"All right!" says he. "That'll be fine. I never had such fun in all my life."
We went to bed about eleven o'clock. We spread down some wide blankets
and quilts and put Red Chief between us. We weren't afraid he'd run away. He
kept us awake for three hours, jumping up and reaching for his rifle and
screeching: "Hist! pard," in mine and Bill's ears, as the fancied crackle of a
twig or the rustle of a leaf revealed to his young imagination the stealthy
approach of the outlaw band. At last, I fell into a troubled sleep, and dreamed
that I had been kidnapped and chained to a tree by a ferocious pirate with red
hair.

Just at daybreak, I was awakened by a series of awful screams from Bill. They
weren't yells, or howls, or shouts, or whoops, or yawps, such as you'd expect
from a manly set of vocal organs—they were simply indecent, terrifying,
humiliating screams, such as women emit when they see ghosts or caterpillars.
It's an awful thing to hear a strong, desperate, fat man scream incontinently in
a cave at daybreak.
I jumped up to see what the matter was. Red Chief was sitting on Bill's chest,
with one hand twined in Bill's hair. In the other he had the sharp case-knife we
used for slicing bacon; and he was industriously and realistically trying to take
Bill's scalp, according to the sentence that had been pronounced upon him the
evening before.
I got the knife away from the kid and made him lie down again. But, from that
moment, Bill's spirit was broken. He laid down on his side of the bed, but he
never closed an eye again in sleep as long as that boy was with us. I dozed off
for a while, but along toward sun-up I remembered that Red Chief had said I
was to be burned at the stake at the rising of the sun. I wasn't nervous or
afraid; but I sat up and lit my pipe and leaned against a rock.
"What you getting up so soon for, Sam?" asked Bill.
"Me?" says I. "Oh, I got a kind of a pain in my shoulder. I thought sitting up
would rest it."
"You're a liar!" says Bill. "You're afraid. You was to be burned at sunrise, and
you was afraid he'd do it. And he would, too, if he could find a match. Ain't it
awful, Sam? Do you think anybody will pay out money to get a little imp like
that back home?"
"Sure," said I. "A rowdy kid like that is just the kind that parents dote on. Now,
you and the Chief get up and cook breakfast, while I go up on the top of this
mountain and reconnoitre."
I went up on the peak of the little mountain and ran my eye over the
contiguous vicinity. Over toward Summit I expected to see the sturdy
yeomanry of the village armed with scythes and pitchforks beating the
countryside for the dastardly kidnappers. But what I saw was a peaceful
landscape dotted with one man ploughing with a dun mule. Nobody was
dragging the creek; no couriers dashed hither and yon, bringing tidings of no
news to the distracted parents. There was a sylvan attitude of somnolent
sleepiness pervading that section of the external outward surface of Alabama
that lay exposed to my view. "Perhaps," says I to myself, "it has not yet been
discovered that the wolves have borne away the tender lambkin from the fold.
Heaven help the wolves!" says I, and I went down the mountain to breakfast.
When I got to the cave I found Bill backed up against the side of it, breathing
hard, and the boy threatening to smash him with a rock half as big as a

cocoanut.
"He put a red-hot boiled potato down my back," explained Bill, "and then
mashed it with his foot; and I boxed his ears. Have you got a gun about you,
Sam?"
I took the rock away from the boy and kind of patched up the argument. "I'll
fix you," says the kid to Bill. "No man ever yet struck the Red Chief but what
he got paid for it. You better beware!"
After breakfast the kid takes a piece of leather with strings wrapped around it
out of his pocket and goes outside the cave unwinding it.
"What's he up to now?" says Bill, anxiously. "You don't think he'll run away,
do you, Sam?"
"No fear of it," says I. "He don't seem to be much of a home body. But we've
got to fix up some plan about the ransom. There don't seem to be much
excitement around Summit on account of his disappearance; but maybe they
haven't realized yet that he's gone. His folks may think he's spending the night
with Aunt Jane or one of the neighbours. Anyhow, he'll be missed to-day. Tonight we must get a message to his father demanding the two thousand dollars
for his return."
Just then we heard a kind Of war-whoop, such as David might have emitted
when he knocked out the champion Goliath. It was a sling that Red Chief had
pulled out of his pocket, and he was whirling it around his head.
I dodged, and heard a heavy thud and a kind of a sigh from Bill, like a horse
gives out when you take his saddle off. A niggerhead rock the size of an egg
had caught Bill just behind his left ear. He loosened himself all over and fell in
the fire across the frying pan of hot water for washing the dishes. I dragged
him out and poured cold water on his head for half an hour.
By and by, Bill sits up and feels behind his ear and says: "Sam, do you know
who my favourite Biblical character is?"
"Take it easy," says I. "You'll come to your senses presently."
"King Herod," says he. "You won't go away and leave me here alone, will you,
Sam?"
I went out and caught that boy and shook him until his freckles rattled.
"If you don't behave," says I, "I'll take you straight home. Now, are you going
to be good, or not?"
"I was only funning," says he sullenly. "I didn't mean to hurt Old Hank. But
what did he hit me for? I'll behave, Snake-eye, if you won't send me home,
and if you'll let me play the Black Scout to-day."
"I don't know the game," says I. "That's for you and Mr. Bill to decide. He's

your playmate for the day. I'm going away for a while, on business. Now, you
come in and make friends with him and say you are sorry for hurting him, or
home you go, at once."
I made him and Bill shake hands, and then I took Bill aside and told him I was
going to Poplar Cove, a little village three miles from the cave, and find out
what I could about how the kidnapping had been regarded in Summit. Also, I
thought it best to send a peremptory letter to old man Dorset that day,
demanding the ransom and dictating how it should be paid.
"You know, Sam," says Bill, "I've stood by you without batting an eye in
earthquakes, fire and flood—in poker games, dynamite outrages, police raids,
train robberies and cyclones. I never lost my nerve yet till we kidnapped that
two-legged skyrocket of a kid. He's got me going. You won't leave me long
with him, will you, Sam?"
"I'll be back some time this afternoon," says I. "You must keep the boy amused
and quiet till I return. And now we'll write the letter to old Dorset."
Bill and I got paper and pencil and worked on the letter while Red Chief, with
a blanket wrapped around him, strutted up and down, guarding the mouth of
the cave. Bill begged me tearfully to make the ransom fifteen hundred dollars
instead of two thousand. "I ain't attempting," says he, "to decry the celebrated
moral aspect of parental affection, but we're dealing with humans, and it ain't
human for anybody to give up two thousand dollars for that forty-pound chunk
of freckled wildcat. I'm willing to take a chance at fifteen hundred dollars. You
can charge the difference up to me."
So, to relieve Bill, I acceded, and we collaborated a letter that ran this way:
Ebenezer Dorset, Esq.:
We have your boy concealed in a place far from Summit. It is useless for
you or the most skilful detectives to attempt to find him. Absolutely, the only
terms on which you can have him restored to you are these: We demand
fifteen hundred dollars in large bills for his return; the money to be left at
midnight to-night at the same spot and in the same box as your reply—as
hereinafter described. If you agree to these terms, send your answer in writing
by a solitary messenger to-night at half-past eight o'clock. After crossing Owl
Creek, on the road to Poplar Cove, there are three large trees about a hundred
yards apart, close to the fence of the wheat field on the right-hand side. At the
bottom of the fence-post, opposite the third tree, will be found a small
pasteboard box.
The messenger will place the answer in this box and return immediately to
Summit.
If you attempt any treachery or fail to comply with our demand as stated,

you will never see your boy again.
If you pay the money as demanded, he will be returned to you safe and
well within three hours. These terms are final, and if you do not accede to
them no further communication will be attempted.
I addressed this letter to Dorset, and put it in my pocket. As I was about to
start, the kid comes up to me and says:
"Aw, Snake-eye, you said I could play the Black Scout while you was gone."
"Play it, of course," says I. "Mr. Bill will play with you. What kind of a game
is it?"
"I'm the Black Scout," says Red Chief, "and I have to ride to the stockade to
warn the settlers that the Indians are coming. I'm tired of playing Indian
myself. I want to be the Black Scout."
"All right," says I. "It sounds harmless to me. I guess Mr. Bill will help you
foil the pesky savages."
"What am I to do?" asks Bill, looking at the kid suspiciously.
"You are the hoss," says Black Scout. "Get down on your hands and knees.
How can I ride to the stockade without a hoss?"
"You'd better keep him interested," said I, "till we get the scheme going.
Loosen up."
Bill gets down on his all fours, and a look comes in his eye like a rabbit's
when you catch it in a trap.
"How far is it to the stockade, kid?" he asks, in a husky manner of voice.
"Ninety miles," says the Black Scout. "And you have to hump yourself to get
there on time. Whoa, now!"
The Black Scout jumps on Bill's back and digs his heels in his side.
"For Heaven's sake," says Bill, "hurry back, Sam, as soon as you can. I wish
we hadn't made the ransom more than a thousand. Say, you quit kicking me or
I'll get up and warm you good."
I walked over to Poplar Cove and sat around the postoffice and store, talking
with the chawbacons that came in to trade. One whiskerando says that he hears
Summit is all upset on account of Elder Ebenezer Dorset's boy having been
lost or stolen. That was all I wanted to know. I bought some smoking tobacco,
referred casually to the price of black-eyed peas, posted my letter
surreptitiously and came away. The postmaster said the mail-carrier would
come by in an hour to take the mail on to Summit.
When I got back to the cave Bill and the boy were not to be found. I explored
the vicinity of the cave, and risked a yodel or two, but there was no response.

So I lighted my pipe and sat down on a mossy bank to await developments.
In about half an hour I heard the bushes rustle, and Bill wabbled out into the
little glade in front of the cave. Behind him was the kid, stepping softly like a
scout, with a broad grin on his face. Bill stopped, took off his hat and wiped
his face with a red handkerchief. The kid stopped about eight feet behind him.
"Sam," says Bill, "I suppose you'll think I'm a renegade, but I couldn't help it.
I'm a grown person with masculine proclivities and habits of self-defense, but
there is a time when all systems of egotism and predominance fail. The boy is
gone. I have sent him home. All is off. There was martyrs in old times," goes
on Bill, "that suffered death rather than give up the particular graft they
enjoyed. None of 'em ever was subjugated to such supernatural tortures as I
have been. I tried to be faithful to our articles of depredation; but there came a
limit."
"What's the trouble, Bill?" I asks him.
"I was rode," says Bill, "the ninety miles to the stockade, not barring an inch.
Then, when the settlers was rescued, I was given oats. Sand ain't a palatable
substitute. And then, for an hour I had to try to explain to him why there was
nothin' in holes, how a road can run both ways and what makes the grass
green. I tell you, Sam, a human can only stand so much. I takes him by the
neck of his clothes and drags him down the mountain. On the way he kicks my
legs black-and-blue from the knees down; and I've got to have two or three
bites on my thumb and hand cauterized.
"But he's gone"—continues Bill—"gone home. I showed him the road to
Summit and kicked him about eight feet nearer there at one kick. I'm sorry we
lose the ransom; but it was either that or Bill Driscoll to the madhouse."
Bill is puffing and blowing, but there is a look of ineffable peace and growing
content on his rose-pink features.
"Bill," says I, "there isn't any heart disease in your family, is there?
"No," says Bill, "nothing chronic except malaria and accidents. Why?"
"Then you might turn around," says I, "and have a took behind you."
Bill turns and sees the boy, and loses his complexion and sits down plump on
the round and begins to pluck aimlessly at grass and little sticks. For an hour I
was afraid for his mind. And then I told him that my scheme was to put the
whole job through immediately and that we would get the ransom and be off
with it by midnight if old Dorset fell in with our proposition. So Bill braced up
enough to give the kid a weak sort of a smile and a promise to play the
Russian in a Japanese war with him is soon as he felt a little better.
I had a scheme for collecting that ransom without danger of being caught by
counterplots that ought to commend itself to professional kidnappers. The tree

under which the answer was to be left—and the money later on—was close to
the road fence with big, bare fields on all sides. If a gang of constables should
be watching for any one to come for the note they could see him a long way
off crossing the fields or in the road. But no, sirree! At half-past eight I was up
in that tree as well hidden as a tree toad, waiting for the messenger to arrive.
Exactly on time, a half-grown boy rides up the road on a bicycle, locates the
pasteboard box at the foot of the fence-post, slips a folded piece of paper into
it and pedals away again back toward Summit.
I waited an hour and then concluded the thing was square. I slid down the tree,
got the note, slipped along the fence till I struck the woods, and was back at
the cave in another half an hour. I opened the note, got near the lantern and
read it to Bill. It was written with a pen in a crabbed hand, and the sum and
substance of it was this:
Two Desperate Men.
Gentlemen: I received your letter to-day by post, in regard to the ransom
you ask for the return of my son. I think you are a little high in your demands,
and I hereby make you a counter-proposition, which I am inclined to believe
you will accept. You bring Johnny home and pay me two hundred and fifty
dollars in cash, and I agree to take him off your hands. You had better come at
night, for the neighbours believe he is lost, and I couldn't be responsible for
what they would do to anybody they saw bringing him back. Very respectfully,
EBENEZER DORSET.
"Great pirates of Penzance!" says I; "of all the impudent—"
But I glanced at Bill, and hesitated. He had the most appealing look in his eyes
I ever saw on the face of a dumb or a talking brute.
"Sam," says he, "what's two hundred and fifty dollars, after all? We've got the
money. One more night of this kid will send me to a bed in Bedlam. Besides
being a thorough gentleman, I think Mr. Dorset is a spendthrift for making us
such a liberal offer. You ain't going to let the chance go, are you?"
"Tell you the truth, Bill," says I, "this little he ewe lamb has somewhat got on
my nerves too. We'll take him home, pay the ransom and make our get-away."
We took him home that night. We got him to go by telling him that his father
had bought a silver-mounted rifle and a pair of moccasins for him, and we
were going to hunt bears the next day.
It was just twelve o'clock when we knocked at Ebenezer's front door. Just at
the moment when I should have been abstracting the fifteen hundred dollars
from the box under the tree, according to the original proposition, Bill was
counting out two hundred and fifty dollars into Dorset's hand.

When the kid found out we were going to leave him at home he started up a
howl like a calliope and fastened himself as tight as a leech to Bill's leg. His
father peeled him away gradually, like a porous plaster.
"How long can you hold him?" asks Bill.
"I'm not as strong as I used to be," says old Dorset, "but I think I can promise
you ten minutes."
"Enough," says Bill. "In ten minutes I shall cross the Central, Southern and
Middle Western States, and be legging it trippingly for the Canadian border."
And, as dark as it was, and as fat as Bill was, and as good a runner as I am, he
was a good mile and a half out of Summit before I could catch up with him.

IX
THE MARRY MONTH OF MAY
Prithee, smite the poet in the eye when he would sing to you praises of the
month of May. It is a month presided over by the spirits of mischief and
madness. Pixies and flibbertigibbets haunt the budding woods: Puck and his
train of midgets are busy in town and country.
In May nature holds up at us a chiding finger, bidding us remember that we
are not gods, but overconceited members of her own great family. She reminds
us that we are brothers to the chowder-doomed clam and the donkey; lineal
scions of the pansy and the chimpanzee, and but cousins-german to the cooing
doves, the quacking ducks and the housemaids and policemen in the parks.
In May Cupid shoots blindfolded—millionaires marry stenographers; wise
professors woo white-aproned gum-chewers behind quick-lunch counters;
schoolma'ams make big bad boys remain after school; lads with ladders steal
lightly over lawns where Juliet waits in her trellissed window with her
telescope packed; young couples out for a walk come home married; old chaps
put on white spats and promenade near the Normal School; even married men,
grown unwontedly tender and sentimental, whack their spouses on the back
and growl: "How goes it, old girl:"
This May, who is no goddess, but Circe, masquerading at the dance given in
honour of the fair débutante, Summer, puts the kibosh on us all.
Old Mr. Coulson groaned a little, and then sat up straight in his invalid's chair.
He had the gout very bad in one foot, a house near Gramercy Park, half a
million dollars and a daughter. And he had a housekeeper, Mrs. Widdup. The
fact and the name deserve a sentence each. They have it.

When May poked Mr. Coulson he became elder brother to the turtle-dove. In
the window near which he sat were boxes of jonquils, of hyacinths, geraniums
and pansies. The breeze brought their odour into the room. Immediately there
was a well-contested round between the breath of the flowers and the able and
active effluvium from gout liniment. The liniment won easily; but not before
the flowers got an uppercut to old Mr. Coulson's nose. The deadly work of the
implacable, false enchantress May was done.
Across the park to the olfactories of Mr. Coulson came other unmistakable,
characteristic, copyrighted smells of spring that belong to the-big-city-abovethe-Subway, alone. The smells of hot asphalt, underground caverns, gasoline,
patchouli, orange peel, sewer gas, Albany grabs, Egyptian cigarettes, mortar
and the undried ink on newspapers. The inblowing air was sweet and mild.
Sparrows wrangled happily everywhere outdoors. Never trust May.
Mr. Coulson twisted the ends of his white mustache, cursed his foot, and
pounded a bell on the table by his side.
In came Mrs. Widdup. She was comely to the eye, fair, flustered, forty and
foxy.
"Higgins is out, sir," she said, with a smile suggestive of vibratory massage.
"He went to post a letter. Can I do anything for you, sir?"
"It's time for my aconite," said old Mr. Coulson. "Drop it for me. The bottle's
there. Three drops. In water. D–––– that is, confound Higgins! There's nobody
in this house cares if I die here in this chair for want of attention."
Mrs. Widdup sighed deeply.
"Don't be saying that, sir," she said. "There's them that would care more than
any one knows. Thirteen drops, you said, sir?"
"Three," said old man Coulson.
He took his dose and then Mrs. Widdup's hand. She blushed. Oh, yes, it can be
done. Just hold your breath and compress the diaphragm.
"Mrs. Widdup," said Mr. Coulson, "the springtime's full upon us."
"Ain't that right?" said Mrs. Widdup. "The air's real warm. And there's bockbeer signs on every corner. And the park's all yaller and pink and blue with
flowers; and I have such shooting pains up my legs and body."
"'In the spring,'" quoted Mr. Coulson, curling his mustache, "'a y–––– that is, a
man's—fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love.'"
"Lawsy, now!" exclaimed Mrs. Widdup; "ain't that right? Seems like it's in the
air."
"'In the spring,'" continued old Mr. Coulson, "'a livelier iris shines upon the
burnished dove.'"

"They do be lively, the Irish," sighed Mrs. Widdup pensively.
"Mrs. Widdup," said Mr. Coulson, making a face at a twinge of his gouty foot,
"this would be a lonesome house without you. I'm an—that is, I'm an elderly
man—but I'm worth a comfortable lot of money. If half a million dollars'
worth of Government bonds and the true affection of a heart that, though no
longer beating with the first ardour of youth, can still throb with genuine—"
The loud noise of an overturned chair near the portières of the adjoining room
interrupted the venerable and scarcely suspecting victim of May.
In stalked Miss Van Meeker Constantia Coulson, bony, durable, tall, highnosed, frigid, well-bred, thirty-five, in-the-neighbourhood-of-GramercyParkish. She put up a lorgnette. Mrs. Widdup hastily stooped and arranged the
bandages on Mr. Coulson's gouty foot.
"I thought Higgins was with you," said Miss Van Meeker Constantia.
"Higgins went out," explained her father, "and Mrs. Widdup answered the bell.
That is better now, Mrs. Widdup, thank you. No; there is nothing else I
require."
The housekeeper retired, pink under the cool, inquiring stare of Miss Coulson.
"This spring weather is lovely, isn't it, daughter?" said the old man,
consciously conscious.
"That's just it," replied Miss Van Meeker Constantia Coulson, somewhat
obscurely. "When does Mrs. Widdup start on her vacation, papa?"
"I believe she said a week from to-day," said Mr. Coulson.
Miss Van Meeker Constantia stood for a minute at the window gazing, toward
the little park, flooded with the mellow afternoon sunlight. With the eye of a
botanist she viewed the flowers—most potent weapons of insidious May. With
the cool pulses of a virgin of Cologne she withstood the attack of the ethereal
mildness. The arrows of the pleasant sunshine fell back, frostbitten, from the
cold panoply of her unthrilled bosom. The odour of the flowers waked no soft
sentiments in the unexplored recesses of her dormant heart. The chirp of the
sparrows gave her a pain. She mocked at May.
But although Miss Coulson was proof against the season, she was keen
enough to estimate its power. She knew that elderly men and thick-waisted
women jumped as educated fleas in the ridiculous train of May, the merry
mocker of the months. She had heard of foolish old gentlemen marrying their
housekeepers before. What a humiliating thing, after all, was this feeling
called love!
The next morning at 8 o'clock, when the iceman called, the cook told him that
Miss Coulson wanted to see him in the basement.

"Well, ain't I the Olcott and Depew; not mentioning the first name at all?" said
the iceman, admiringly, of himself.
As a concession he rolled his sleeves down, dropped his icehooks on a syringa
and went back. When Miss Van Meeker Constantia Coulson addressed him he
took off his hat.
"There is a rear entrance to this basement," said Miss Coulson, "which can be
reached by driving into the vacant lot next door, where they are excavating for
a building. I want you to bring in that way within two hours 1,000 pounds of
ice. You may have to bring another man or two to help you. I will show you
where I want it placed. I also want 1,000 pounds a day delivered the same way
for the next four days. Your company may charge the ice on our regular bill.
This is for your extra trouble."
Miss Coulson tendered a ten-dollar bill. The iceman bowed, and held his hat in
his two hands behind him.
"Not if you'll excuse me, lady. It'll be a pleasure to fix things up for you any
way you please."
Alas for May!
About noon Mr. Coulson knocked two glasses off his table, broke the spring of
his bell and yelled for Higgins at the same time.
"Bring an axe," commanded Mr. Coulson, sardonically, "or send out for a
quart of prussic acid, or have a policeman come in and shoot me. I'd rather that
than be frozen to death."
"It does seem to be getting cool, Sir," said Higgins. "I hadn't noticed it before.
I'll close the window, Sir."
"Do," said Mr. Coulson. "They call this spring, do they? If it keeps up long I'll
go back to Palm Beach. House feels like a morgue."
Later Miss Coulson dutifully came in to inquire how the gout was progressing.
"'Stantia," said the old man, "how is the weather outdoors?"
"Bright," answered Miss Coulson, "but chilly."
"Feels like the dead of winter to me," said Mr. Coulson.
"An instance," said Constantia, gazing abstractedly out the window, "of 'winter
lingering in the lap of spring,' though the metaphor is not in the most refined
taste."
A little later she walked down by the side of the little park and on westward to
Broadway to accomplish a little shopping.
A little later than that Mrs. Widdup entered the invalid's room.
"Did you ring, Sir?" she asked, dimpling in many places. "I asked Higgins to

go to the drug store, and I thought I heard your bell."
"I did not," said Mr. Coulson.
"I'm afraid," said Mrs. Widdup, "I interrupted you sir, yesterday when you
were about to say something."
"How comes it, Mrs. Widdup," said old man Coulson sternly, "that I find it so
cold in this house?"
"Cold, Sir?" said the housekeeper, "why, now, since you speak of it it do seem
cold in this room. But, outdoors it's as warm and fine as June, sir. And how
this weather do seem to make one's heart jump out of one's shirt waist, sir. And
the ivy all leaved out on the side of the house, and the hand-organs playing,
and the children dancing on the sidewalk—'tis a great time for speaking out
what's in the heart. You were saying yesterday, sir—"
"Woman!" roared Mr. Coulson; "you are a fool. I pay you to take care of this
house. I am freezing to death in my own room, and you come in and drivel to
me about ivy and hand-organs. Get me an overcoat at once. See that all doors
and windows are closed below. An old, fat, irresponsible, one-sided object like
you prating about springtime and flowers in the middle of winter! When
Higgins comes back, tell him to bring me a hot rum punch. And now get out!"
But who shall shame the bright face of May? Rogue though she be and
disturber of sane men's peace, no wise virgins cunning nor cold storage shall
make her bow her head in the bright galaxy of months.
Oh, yes, the story was not quite finished.
A night passed, and Higgins helped old man Coulson in the morning to his
chair by the window. The cold of the room was gone. Heavenly odours and
fragrant mildness entered.
In hurried Mrs. Widdup, and stood by his chair. Mr. Coulson reached his bony
hand and grasped her plump one.
"Mrs. Widdup," he said, "this house would be no home without you. I have
half a million dollars. If that and the true affection of a heart no lonoer in its
youthful prime, but still not cold, could—"
"I found out what made it cold," said Mrs. Widdup, leanin' against his chair.
"'Twas ice—tons of it—in the basement and in the furnace room, everywhere.
I shut off the registers that it was coming through into your room, Mr.
Coulson, poor soul! And now it's Maytime again."
"A true heart," went on old man Coulson, a little wanderingly, "that the
springtime has brought to life again, and—but what will my daughter say,
Mrs. Widdup?"
"Never fear, sir," said Mrs. Widdup, cheerfully. "Miss Coulson, she ran away

with the iceman last night, sir!"

X
A TECHNICAL ERROR

I never cared especially for feuds, believing them to be even more overrated
products of our country than grapefruit, scrapple, or honeymoons.
Nevertheless, if I may be allowed, I will tell you of an Indian Territory feud of
which I was press-agent, camp-follower, and inaccessory during the fact.
I was on a visit to Sam Durkee's ranch, where I had a great time falling off
unmanicured ponies and waving my bare hand at the lower jaws of wolves
about two miles away. Sam was a hardened person of about twenty-five, with
a reputation for going home in the dark with perfect equanimity, though often
with reluctance.
Over in the Creek Nation was a family bearing the name of Tatum. I was told
that the Durkees and Tatums had been feuding for years. Several of each
family had bitten the grass, and it was expected that more Nebuchadnezzars
would follow. A younger generation of each family was growing up, and the
grass was keeping pace with them. But I gathered that they had fought fairly;
that they had not lain in cornfields and aimed at the division of their enemies'
suspenders in the back—partly, perhaps, because there were no cornfields, and
nobody wore more than one suspender. Nor had any woman or child of either
house ever been harmed. In those days—and you will find it so yet—their
women were safe.
Sam Durkee had a girl. (If it were an all-fiction magazine that I expect to sell
this story to, I should say, "Mr. Durkee rejoiced in a fiancée.") Her name was
Ella Baynes. They appeared to be devoted to each other, and to have perfect
confidence in each other, as all couples do who are and have or aren't and
haven't. She was tolerably pretty, with a heavy mass of brown hair that helped
her along. He introduced me to her, which seemed not to lessen her preference
for him; so I reasoned that they were surely soul-mates.
Miss Baynes lived in Kingfisher, twenty miles from the ranch. Sam lived on a
gallop between the two places.
One day there came to Kingfisher a courageous young man, rather small, with
smooth face and regular features. He made many inquiries about the business
of the town, and especially of the inhabitants cognominally. He said he was
from Muscogee, and he looked it, with his yellow shoes and crocheted four-inhand. I met him once when I rode in for the mail. He said his name was

Beverly Travers, which seemed rather improbable.
There were active times on the ranch, just then, and Sam was too busy to go to
town often. As an incompetent and generally worthless guest, it devolved
upon me to ride in for little things such as post cards, barrels of flour, bakingpowder, smoking-tobacco, and—letters from Ella.
One day, when I was messenger for half a gross of cigarette papers and a
couple of wagon tires, I saw the alleged Beverly Travers in a yellow-wheeled
buggy with Ella Baynes, driving about town as ostentatiously as the black,
waxy mud would permit. I knew that this information would bring no balm of
Gilead to Sam's soul, so I refrained from including it in the news of the city
that I retailed on my return. But on the next afternoon an elongated ex-cowboy
of the name of Simmons, an old-time pal of Sam's, who kept a feed store in
Kingfisher, rode out to the ranch and rolled and burned many cigarettes before
he would talk. When he did make oration, his words were these:
"Say, Sam, there's been a description of a galoot miscallin' himself Beveledged Travels impairing the atmospheric air of Kingfisher for the past two
weeks. You know who he was? He was not otherwise than Ben Tatum, from
the Creek Nation, son of old Gopher Tatum that your Uncle Newt shot last
February. You know what he done this morning? He killed your brother Lester
—shot him in the co't-house yard."
I wondered if Sam had heard. He pulled a twig from a mesquite bush, chewed
it gravely, and said:
"He did, did he? He killed Lester?"
"The same," said Simmons. "And he did more. He run away with your girl, the
same as to say Miss Ella Baynes. I thought you might like to know, so I rode
out to impart the information."
"I am much obliged, Jim," said Sam, taking the chewed twig from his mouth.
"Yes, I'm glad you rode Out. Yes, I'm right glad."
"Well, I'll be ridin' back, I reckon. That boy I left in the feed store don't know
hay from oats. He shot Lester in the back."
"Shot him in the back?"
"Yes, while he was hitchin' his hoss."
"I'm much obliged, Jim."
"I kind of thought you'd like to know as soon as you could."
"Come in and have some coffee before you ride back, Jim?"
"Why, no, I reckon not; I must get back to the store."
"And you say—"

"Yes, Sam. Everybody seen 'em drive away together in a buckboard, with a big
bundle, like clothes, tied up in the back of it. He was drivin' the team he
brought over with him from Muscogee. They'll be hard to overtake right
away."
"And which—"
"I was goin' on to tell you. They left on the Guthrie road; but there's no tellin'
which forks they'll take—you know that."
"All right, Jim; much obliged."
"You're welcome, Sam."
Simmons rolled a cigarette and stabbed his pony with both heels. Twenty
yards away he reined up and called back:
"You don't want no—assistance, as you might say?"
"Not any, thanks."
"I didn't think you would. Well, so long!"
Sam took out and opened a bone-handled pocket-knife and scraped a dried
piece of mud from his left boot. I thought at first he was going to swear a
vendetta on the blade of it, or recite "The Gipsy's Curse." The few feuds I had
ever seen or read about usually opened that way. This one seemed to be
presented with a new treatment. Thus offered on the stage, it would have been
hissed off, and one of Belasco's thrilling melodramas demanded instead.
"I wonder," said Sam, with a profoundly thoughtful expression, "if the cook
has any cold beans left over!"
He called Wash, the Negro cook, and finding that he had some, ordered him to
heat up the pot and make some strong coffee. Then we went into Sam's private
room, where he slept, and kept his armoury, dogs, and the saddles of his
favourite mounts. He took three or four six-shooters out of a bookcase and
began to look them over, whistling "The Cowboy's Lament" abstractedly.
Afterward he ordered the two best horses on the ranch saddled and tied to the
hitching-post.
Now, in the feud business, in all sections of the country, I have observed that
in one particular there is a delicate but strict etiquette belonging. You must not
mention the word or refer to the subject in the presence of a feudist. It would
be more reprehensible than commenting upon the mole on the chin of your
rich aunt. I found, later on, that there is another unwritten rule, but I think that
belongs solely to the West.
It yet lacked two hours to supper-time; but in twenty minutes Sam and I were
plunging deep into the reheated beans, hot coffee, and cold beef.
"Nothing like a good meal before a long ride," said Sam. "Eat hearty."

I had a sudden suspicion.
"Why did you have two horses saddled?" I asked.
"One, two—one, two," said Sam. "You can count, can't you?"
His mathematics carried with it a momentary qualm and a lesson. The thought
had not occurred to him that the thought could possibly occur to me not to ride
at his side on that red road to revenge and justice. It was the higher calculus. I
was booked for the trail. I began to eat more beans.
In an hour we set forth at a steady gallop eastward. Our horses were
Kentucky-bred, strengthened by the mesquite grass of the west. Ben Tatum's
steeds may have been swifter, and he had a good lead; but if he had heard the
punctual thuds of the hoofs of those trailers of ours, born in the heart of
feudland, he might have felt that retribution was creeping up on the hoofprints of his dapper nags.
I knew that Ben Tatum's card to play was flight—flight until he came within
the safer territory of his own henchmen and supporters. He knew that the man
pursuing him would follow the trail to any end where it might lead.
During the ride Sam talked of the prospect for rain, of the price of beef, and of
the musical glasses. You would have thought he had never had a brother or a
sweetheart or an enemy on earth. There are some subjects too big even for the
words in the "Unabridged." Knowing this phase of the feud code, but not
having practised it sufficiently, I overdid the thing by telling some slightly
funny anecdotes. Sam laughed at exactly the right place—laughed with his
mouth. When I caught sight of his mouth, I wished I had been blessed with
enough sense of humour to have suppressed those anecdotes.
Our first sight of them we had in Guthrie. Tired and hungry, we stumbled,
unwashed, into a little yellow-pine hotel and sat at a table. In the opposite
corner we saw the fugitives. They were bent upon their meal, but looked
around at times uneasily.
The girl was dressed in brown—one of these smooth, half-shiny, silky-looking
affairs with lace collar and cuffs, and what I believe they call an accordionplaited skirt. She wore a thick brown veil down to her nose, and a broadbrimmed straw hat with some kind of feathers adorning it. The man wore
plain, dark clothes, and his hair was trimmed very short. He was such a man as
you might see anywhere.
There they were—the murderer and the woman he had stolen. There we were
—the rightful avenger, according to the code, and the supernumerary who
writes these words.
For one time, at least, in the heart of the supernumerary there rose the killing
instinct. For one moment he joined the force of combatants—orally.

"What are you waiting for, Sam?" I said in a whisper. "Let him have it now!"
Sam gave a melancholy sigh.
"You don't understand; but he does," he said. "He knows. Mr. Tenderfoot,
there's a rule out here among white men in the Nation that you can't shoot a
man when he's with a woman. I never knew it to be broke yet. You can't do it.
You've got to get him in a gang of men or by himself. That's why. He knows it,
too. We all know. So, that's Mr. Ben Tatum! One of the 'pretty men'! I'll cut
him out of the herd before they leave the hotel, and regulate his account!"
After supper the flying pair disappeared quickly. Although Sam haunted lobby
and stairway and halls half the night, in some mysterious way the fugitives
eluded him; and in the morning the veiled lady in the brown dress with the
accordion-plaited skirt and the dapper young man with the close-clipped hair,
and the buckboard with the prancing nags, were gone.
It is a monotonous story, that of the ride; so it shall be curtailed. Once again
we overtook them on a road. We were about fifty yards behind. They turned in
the buckboard and looked at us; then drove on without whipping up their
horses. Their safety no longer lay in speed. Ben Tatum knew. He knew that the
only rock of safety left to him was the code. There is no doubt that, had he
been alone, the matter would have been settled quickly with Sam Durkee in
the usual way; but he had something at his side that kept still the trigger-finger
of both. It seemed likely that he was no coward.
So, you may perceive that woman, on occasions, may postpone instead of
precipitating conflict between man and man. But not willingly or consciously.
She is oblivious of codes.
Five miles farther, we came upon the future great Western city of Chandler.
The horses of pursuers and pursued were starved and weary. There was one
hotel that offered danger to man and entertainment to beast; so the four of us
met again in the dining room at the ringing of a bell so resonant and large that
it had cracked the welkin long ago. The dining room was not as large as the
one at Guthrie.
Just as we were eating apple pie—how Ben Davises and tragedy impinge upon
each other!—I noticed Sam looking with keen intentness at our quarry where
they were seated at a table across the room. The girl still wore the brown dress
with lace collar and cuffs, and the veil drawn down to her nose. The man bent
over his plate, with his close cropped head held low.
"There's a code," I heard Sam say, either to me or to himself, "that won't let
you shoot a man in the company of a woman; but, by thunder, there ain't one
to keep you from killing a woman in the company of a man!"
And, quicker than my mind could follow his argument, he whipped a Colt's

automatic from under his left arm and pumped six bullets into the body that
the brown dress covered—the brown dress with the lace collar and cuffs and
the accordion-plaited skirt.
The young person in the dark sack suit, from whose head and from whose life
a woman's glory had been clipped, laid her head on her arms stretched upon
the table; while people came running to raise Ben Tatum from the floor in his
feminine masquerade that had given Sam the opportunity to set aside,
technically, the obligations of the code.

XI
SUITE HOMES AND THEIR ROMANCE

Few young couples in the Big-City-of-Bluff began their married existence
with greater promise of happiness than did Mr. and Mrs. Claude Turpin. They
felt no especial animosity toward each other; they were comfortably
established in a handsome apartment house that had a name and
accommodations like those of a sleeping-car; they were living as expensively
as the couple on the next floor above who had twice their income; and their
marriage had occurred on a wager, a ferry-boat and first acquaintance, thus
securing a sensational newspaper notice with their names attached to pictures
of the Queen of Roumania and M. Santos-Dumont.
Turpin's income was $200 per month. On pay day, after calculating the
amounts due for rent, instalments on furniture and piano, gas, and bills owed
to the florist, confectioner, milliner, tailor, wine merchant and cab company,
the Turpins would find that they still had $200 left to spend. How to do this is
one of the secrets of metropolitan life.
The domestic life of the Turpins was a beautiful picture to see. But you
couldn't gaze upon it as you could at an oleograph of "Don't Wake Grandma,"
or "Brooklyn by Moonlight."
You had to blink when looked at it; and you heard a fizzing sound just like the
machine with a "scope" at the end of it. Yes; there wasn't much repose about
the picture of the Turpins' domestic life. It was something like "Spearing
Salmon in the Columbia River," or "Japanese Artillery in Action."
Every day was just like another; as the days are in New York. In the morning
Turpin would take bromo-seltzer, his pocket change from under the clock, his
hat, no breakfast and his departure for the office. At noon Mrs. Turpin would
get out of bed and humour, put on a kimono, airs, and the water to boil for
coffee.

Turpin lunched downtown. He came home at 6 to dress for dinner. They
always dined out. They strayed from the chop-house to chop-sueydom, from
terrace to table d'hôte, from rathskeller to roadhouse, from café to casino, from
Maria's to the Martha Washington. Such is domestic life in the great city. Your
vine is the mistletoe; your fig tree bears dates. Your household gods are
Mercury and John Howard Payne. For the wedding march you now hear only
"Come with the Gypsy Bride." You rarely dine at the same place twice in
succession. You tire of the food; and, besides, you want to give them time for
the question of that souvenir silver sugar bowl to blow over.
The Turpins were therefore happy. They made many warm and delightful
friends, some of whom they remembered the next day. Their home life was an
ideal one, according to the rules and regulations of the Book of Bluff.
There came a time when it dawned upon Turpin that his wife was getting away
with too much money. If you belong to the near-swell class in the Big City,
and your income is $200 per month, and you find at the end of the month, after
looking over the bills for current expenses, that you, yourself, have spent
$150, you very naturally wonder what has become of the other $50. So you
suspect your wife. And perhaps you give her a hint that something needs
explanation.
"I say, Vivien," said Turpin, one afternoon when they were enjoying in rapt
silence the peace and quiet of their cozy apartment, "you've been creating a
hiatus big enough for a dog to crawl through in this month's honorarium. You
haven't been paying your dressmaker anything on account, have you?"
There was a moment's silence. No sounds could be heard except the breathing
of the fox terrier, and the subdued, monotonous sizzling of Vivien's fulvous
locks against the insensate curling irons. Claude Turpin, sitting upon a pillow
that he had thoughtfully placed upon the convolutions of the apartment sofa,
narrowly watched the riante, lovely face of his wife.
"Claudie, dear," said she, touching her finger to her ruby tongue and testing
the unresponsive curling irons, "you do me an injustice. Mme. Toinette has not
seen a cent of mine since the day you paid your tailor ten dollars on account."
Turpin's suspicions were allayed for the time. But one day soon there came an
anonymous letter to him that read:
Watch your wife. She is blowing in your money secretly. I was a sufferer
just as you are. The place is No. 345 Blank Street. A word to the wise, etc.
A MAN WHO KNOWS.
Turpin took this letter to the captain of police of the precinct that he lived in.
"My precinct is as clean as a hound's tooth," said the captain. "The lid's shut
down as close there as it is over the eye of a Williamsburg girl when she's

kissed at a party. But if you think there's anything queer at the address, I'll go
there with ye."
On the next afternoon at 3, Turpin and the captain crept softly up the stairs of
No. 345 Blank Street. A dozen plain-clothes men, dressed in full police
uniforms, so as to allay suspicion, waited in the hall below.
At the top of the stairs was a door, which was found to be locked. The captain
took a key from his pocket and unlocked it. The two men entered.
They found themselves in a large room, occupied by twenty or twenty-five
elegantly clothed ladies. Racing charts hung against the walls, a ticker clicked
in one corner; with a telephone receiver to his ear a man was calling out the
various positions of the horses in a very exciting race. The occupants of the
room looked up at the intruders; but, as if reassured by the sight of the
captain's uniform, they reverted their attention to the man at the telephone.
"You see," said the captain to Turpin, "the value of an anonymous letter! No
high-minded and self-respecting gentleman should consider one worthy of
notice. Is your wife among this assembly, Mr. Turpin?"
"She is not," said Turpin.
"And if she was," continued the captain, "would she be within the reach of the
tongue of slander? These ladies constitute a Browning Society. They meet to
discuss the meaning of the great poet. The telephone is connected with Boston,
whence the parent society transmits frequently its interpretations of the poems.
Be ashamed of yer suspicions, Mr. Turpin."
"Go soak your shield," said Turpin. "Vivien knows how to take care of herself
in a pool-room. She's not dropping anything on the ponies. There must be
something queer going on here."
"Nothing but Browning," said the captain. "Hear that?"
"Thanatopsis by a nose," drawled the man at the telephone.
"That's not Browning; that's Longfellow," said Turpin, who sometimes read
books.
"Back to the pasture!" exclaimed the captain. "Longfellow made the pacingto-wagon record of 7.53 'way back in 1868."
"I believe there's something queer about this joint," repeated Turpin.
"I don't see it," said the captain.
"I know it looks like a pool-room, all right," persisted Turpin, "but that's all a
blind. Vivien has been dropping a lot of coin somewhere. I believe there's
some under-handed work going on here."
A number of racing sheets were tacked close together, covering a large space

on one of the walls. Turpin, suspicious, tore several of them down. A door,
previously hidden, was revealed. Turpin placed an ear to the crack and listened
intently. He heard the soft hum of many voices, low and guarded laughter, and
a sharp, metallic clicking and scraping as if from a multitude of tiny but busy
objects.
"My God! It is as I feared!" whispered Turpin to himself. "Summon your men
at once!" he called to the captain. "She is in there, I know."
At the blowing of the captain's whistle the uniformed plain-clothes men rushed
up the stairs into the pool-room. When they saw the betting paraphernalia
distributed around they halted, surprised and puzzled to know why they had
been summoned.
But the captain pointed to the locked door and bade them break it down. In a
few moments they demolished it with the axes they carried. Into the other
room sprang Claude Turpin, with the captain at his heels.
The scene was one that lingered long in Turpin's mind. Nearly a score of
women—women expensively and fashionably clothed, many beautiful and of
refined appearance—had been seated at little marble-topped tables. When the
police burst open the door they shrieked and ran here and there like gayly
plumed birds that had been disturbed in a tropical grove. Some became
hysterical; one or two fainted; several knelt at the feet of the officers and
besought them for mercy on account of their families and social position.
A man who had been seated behind a desk had seized a roll of currency as
large as the ankle of a Paradise Roof Gardens chorus girl and jumped out of
the window. Half a dozen attendants huddled at one end of the room,
breathless from fear.
Upon the tables remained the damning and incontrovertible evidences of the
guilt of the habituées of that sinister room—dish after dish heaped high with
ice cream, and surrounded by stacks of empty ones, scraped to the last
spoonful.
"Ladies," said the captain to his weeping circle of prisoners, "I'll not hold any
of yez. Some of yez I recognize as having fine houses and good standing in the
community, with hard-working husbands and childer at home. But I'll read ye
a bit of a lecture before ye go. In the next room there's a 20-to-1 shot just
dropped in under the wire three lengths ahead of the field. Is this the way ye
waste your husbands' money instead of helping earn it? Home wid yez! The
lid's on the ice-cream freezer in this precinct."
Claude Turpin's wife was among the patrons of the raided room. He led her to
their apartment in stern silence. There she wept so remorsefully and besought
his forgiveness so pleadingly that he forgot his just anger, and soon he
gathered his penitent golden-haired Vivien in his arms and forgave her.

"Darling," she murmured, half sobbingly, as the moonlight drifted through the
open window, glorifying her sweet, upturned face, "I know I done wrong. I
will never touch ice cream again. I forgot you were not a millionaire. I used to
go there every day. But to-day I felt some strange, sad presentiment of evil,
and I was not myself. I ate only eleven saucers."
"Say no more," said Claude, gently as he fondly caressed her waving curls.
"And you are sure that you fully forgive me?" asked Vivien, gazing at him
entreatingly with dewy eyes of heavenly blue.
"Almost sure, little one," answered Claude, stooping and lightly touching her
snowy forehead with his lips. "I'll let you know later on. I've got a month's
salary down on Vanilla to win the three-year-old steeplechase to-morrow; and
if the ice-cream hunch is to the good you are It again—see?"

XII
THE WHIRLIGIG OF LIFE
Justice-of-the-Peace Benaja Widdup sat in the door of his office smoking his
elder-stem pipe. Half-way to the zenith the Cumberland range rose blue-gray
in the afternoon haze. A speckled hen swaggered down the main street of the
"settlement," cackling foolishly.
Up the road came a sound of creaking axles, and then a slow cloud of dust,
and then a bull-cart bearing Ransie Bilbro and his wife. The cart stopped at the
Justice's door, and the two climbed down. Ransie was a narrow six feet of
sallow brown skin and yellow hair. The imperturbability of the mountains
hung upon him like a suit of armour. The woman was calicoed, angled, snuffbrushed, and weary with unknown desires. Through it all gleamed a faint
protest of cheated youth unconscious of its loss.
The Justice of the Peace slipped his feet into his shoes, for the sake of dignity,
and moved to let them enter.
"We-all," said the woman, in a voice like the wind blowing through pine
boughs, "wants a divo'ce." She looked at Ransie to see if he noted any flaw or
ambiguity or evasion or partiality or self-partisanship in her statement of their
business.
"A divo'ce," repeated Ransie, with a solemn nod. "We-all can't git along
together nohow. It's lonesome enough fur to live in the mount'ins when a man
and a woman keers fur one another. But when she's a-spittin' like a wildcat or
a-sullenin' like a hoot-owl in the cabin, a man ain't got no call to live with her."
"When he's a no-'count varmint," said the woman, "without any especial

warmth, a-traipsin' along of scalawags and moonshiners and a-layin' on his
back pizen 'ith co'n whiskey, and a-pesterin' folks with a pack o' hungry, triflin'
houn's to feed!"
"When she keeps a-throwin' skillet lids," came Ransie's antiphony, "and slings
b'ilin' water on the best coon-dog in the Cumberlands, and sets herself agin'
cookin' a man's victuals, and keeps him awake o' nights accusin' him of a sight
of doin's!"
"When he's al'ays a-fightin' the revenues, and gits a hard name in the
mount'ins fur a mean man, who's gwine to be able fur to sleep o' nights?"
The Justice of the Peace stirred deliberately to his duties. He placed his one
chair and a wooden stool for his petitioners. He opened his book of statutes on
the table and scanned the index. Presently he wiped his spectacles and shifted
his inkstand.
"The law and the statutes," said he, "air silent on the subjeck of divo'ce as fur
as the jurisdiction of this co't air concerned. But, accordin' to equity and the
Constitution and the golden rule, it's a bad barg'in that can't run both ways. If a
justice of the peace can marry a couple, it's plain that he is bound to be able to
divo'ce 'em. This here office will issue a decree of divo'ce and abide by the
decision of the Supreme Co't to hold it good."
Ransie Bilbro drew a small tobacco-bag from his trousers pocket. Out of this
he shook upon the table a five-dollar note. "Sold a b'arskin and two foxes fur
that," he remarked. "It's all the money we got."
"The regular price of a divo'ce in this co't," said the Justice, "air five dollars."
He stuffed the bill into the pocket of his homespun vest with a deceptive air of
indifference. With much bodily toil and mental travail he wrote the decree
upon half a sheet of foolscap, and then copied it upon the other. Ransie Bilbro
and his wife listened to his reading of the document that was to give them
freedom:
"Know all men by these presents that Ransie Bilbro and his wife, Ariela
Bilbro, this day personally appeared before me and promises that hereinafter
they will neither love, honour, nor obey each other, neither for better nor
worse, being of sound mind and body, and accept summons for divorce
according to the peace and dignity of the State. Herein fail not, so help you
God. Benaja Widdup, justice of the peace in and for the county of Piedmont,
State of Tennessee."
The Justice was about to hand one of the documents to Ransie. The voice of
Ariela delayed the transfer. Both men looked at her. Their dull masculinity was
confronted by something sudden and unexpected in the woman.
"Judge, don't you give him that air paper yit. 'Tain't all settled, nohow. I got to

have my rights first. I got to have my ali-money. 'Tain't no kind of a way to do
fur a man to divo'ce his wife 'thout her havin' a cent fur to do with. I'm a-layin'
off to be a-goin' up to brother Ed's up on Hogback Mount'in. I'm bound fur to
hev a pa'r of shoes and some snuff and things besides. Ef Rance kin affo'd a
divo'ce, let him pay me ali-money."
Ransie Bilbro was stricken to dumb perplexity. There had been no previous
hint of alimony. Women were always bringing up startling and unlooked-for
issues.
Justice Benaja Widdup felt that the point demanded judicial decision. The
authorities were also silent on the subject of alimony. But the woman's feet
were bare. The trail to Hogback Mountain was steep and flinty.
"Ariela Bilbro," he asked, in official tones, "how much did you 'low would be
good and sufficient ali-money in the case befo' the co't."
"I 'lowed," she answered, "fur the shoes and all, to say five dollars. That ain't
much fur ali-money, but I reckon that'll git me to up brother Ed's."
"The amount," said the Justice, "air not onreasonable. Ransie Bilbro, you air
ordered by the co't to pay the plaintiff the sum of five dollars befo' the decree
of divo'ce air issued."
"I hain't no mo' money," breathed Ransie, heavily. "I done paid you all I had."
"Otherwise," said the Justice, looking severely over his spectacles, "you air in
contempt of co't."
"I reckon if you gimme till to-morrow," pleaded the husband, "I mout be able
to rake or scrape it up somewhars. I never looked for to be a-payin' no alimoney."
"The case air adjourned," said Benaja Widdup, "till to-morrow, when you-all
will present yo'selves and obey the order of the co't. Followin' of which the
decrees of divo'ce will be delivered." He sat down in the door and began to
loosen a shoestring.
"We mout as well go down to Uncle Ziah's," decided Ransie, "and spend the
night." He climbed into the cart on one side, and Ariela climbed in on the
other. Obeying the flap of his rope, the little red bull slowly came around on a
tack, and the cart crawled away in the nimbus arising from its wheels.
Justice-of-the-peace Benaja Widdup smoked his elder-stem pipe. Late in the
afternoon he got his weekly paper, and read it until the twilight dimmed its
lines. Then he lit the tallow candle on his table, and read until the moon rose,
marking the time for supper. He lived in the double log cabin on the slope near
the girdled poplar. Going home to supper he crossed a little branch darkened
by a laurel thicket. The dark figure of a man stepped from the laurels and
pointed a rifle at his breast. His hat was pulled down low, and something

covered most of his face.
"I want yo' money," said the figure, "'thout any talk. I'm gettin' nervous, and
my finger's a-wabblin' on this here trigger."
"I've only got f-f-five dollars," said the Justice, producing it from his vest
pocket.
"Roll it up," came the order, "and stick it in the end of this here gun-bar'l."
The bill was crisp and new. Even fingers that were clumsy and trembling
found little difficulty in making a spill of it and inserting it (this with less ease)
into the muzzle of the rifle.
"Now I reckon you kin be goin' along," said the robber.
The Justice lingered not on his way.
The next day came the little red bull, drawing the cart to the office door.
Justice Benaja Widdup had his shoes on, for he was expecting the visit. In his
presence Ransie Bilbro handed to his wife a five-dollar bill. The official's eye
sharply viewed it. It seemed to curl up as though it had been rolled and
inserted into the end of a gun-barrel. But the Justice refrained from comment.
It is true that other bills might be inclined to curl. He handed each one a decree
of divorce. Each stood awkwardly silent, slowly folding the guarantee of
freedom. The woman cast a shy glance full of constraint at Ransie.
"I reckon you'll be goin' back up to the cabin," she said, along 'ith the bull-cart.
There's bread in the tin box settin' on the shelf. I put the bacon in the b'ilin'-pot
to keep the hounds from gittin' it. Don't forget to wind the clock to-night."
"You air a-goin' to your brother Ed's?" asked Ransie, with fine unconcern.
"I was 'lowin' to get along up thar afore night. I ain't sayin' as they'll pester
theyselves any to make me welcome, but I hain't nowhar else fur to go. It's a
right smart ways, and I reckon I better be goin'. I'll be a-sayin' good-bye,
Ranse—that is, if you keer fur to say so."
"I don't know as anybody's a hound dog," said Ransie, in a martyr's voice, "fur
to not want to say good-bye—'less you air so anxious to git away that you
don't want me to say it."
Ariela was silent. She folded the five-dollar bill and her decree carefully, and
placed them in the bosom of her dress. Benaja Widdup watched the money
disappear with mournful eyes behind his spectacles.
And then with his next words he achieved rank (as his thoughts ran) with
either the great crowd of the world's sympathizers or the little crowd of its
great financiers.
"Be kind o' lonesome in the old cabin to-night, Ranse," he said.

Ransie Bilbro stared out at the Cumberlands, clear blue now in the sunlight.
He did not look at Ariela.
"I 'low it might be lonesome," he said; "but when folks gits mad and wants a
divo'ce, you can't make folks stay."
"There's others wanted a divo'ce," said Ariela, speaking to the wooden stool.
"Besides, nobody don't want nobody to stay."
"Nobody never said they didn't."
"Nobody never said they did. I reckon I better start on now to brother Ed's."
"Nobody can't wind that old clock."
"Want me to go back along 'ith you in the cart and wind it fur you, Ranse?"
The mountaineer's countenance was proof against emotion. But he reached out
a big hand and enclosed Ariela's thin brown one. Her soul peeped out once
through her impassive face, hallowing it.
"Them hounds shan't pester you no more," said Ransie. "I reckon I been mean
and low down. You wind that clock, Ariela."
"My heart hit's in that cabin, Ranse," she whispered, "along 'ith you. I ai'nt agoin' to git mad no more. Le's be startin', Ranse, so's we kin git home by
sundown."
Justice-of-the-peace Benaja Widdup interposed as they started for the door,
forgetting his presence.
"In the name of the State of Tennessee," he said, "I forbid you-all to be adefyin' of its laws and statutes. This co't is mo' than willin' and full of joy to
see the clouds of discord and misunderstandin' rollin' away from two lovin'
hearts, but it air the duty of the co't to p'eserve the morals and integrity of the
State. The co't reminds you that you air no longer man and wife, but air
divo'ced by regular decree, and as such air not entitled to the benefits and
'purtenances of the mattermonal estate."
Ariela caught Ransie's arm. Did those words mean that she must lose him now
when they had just learned the lesson of life?
"But the co't air prepared," went on the Justice, "fur to remove the disabilities
set up by the decree of divo'ce. The co't air on hand to perform the solemn
ceremony of marri'ge, thus fixin' things up and enablin' the parties in the case
to resume the honour'ble and elevatin' state of mattermony which they desires.
The fee fur performin' said ceremony will be, in this case, to wit, five dollars."
Ariela caught the gleam of promise in his words. Swiftly her hand went to her
bosom. Freely as an alighting dove the bill fluttered to the Justice's table. Her
sallow cheek coloured as she stood hand in hand with Ransie and listened to
the reuniting words.

Ransie helped her into the cart, and climbed in beside her. The little red bull
turned once more, and they set out, hand-clasped, for the mountains.
Justice-of-the-peace Benaja Widdup sat in his door and took off his shoes.
Once again he fingered the bill tucked down in his vest pocket. Once again he
smoked his elder-stem pipe. Once again the speckled hen swaggered down the
main street of the "settlement," cackling foolishly.

XIII
A SACRIFICE HIT
The editor of the Hearthstone Magazine has his own ideas about the selection
of manuscript for his publication. His theory is no secret; in fact, he will
expound it to you willingly sitting at his mahogany desk, smiling benignantly
and tapping his knee gently with his gold-rimmed eye-glasses.
"The Hearthstone," he will say, "does not employ a staff of readers. We obtain
opinions of the manuscripts submitted to us directly from types of the various
classes of our readers."
That is the editor's theory; and this is the way he carries it out:
When a batch of MSS. is received the editor stuffs every one of his pockets
full of them and distributes them as he goes about during the day. The office
employees, the hall porter, the janitor, the elevator man, messenger boys, the
waiters at the café where the editor has luncheon, the man at the news-stand
where he buys his evening paper, the grocer and milkman, the guard on the
5.30 uptown elevated train, the ticket-chopper at Sixty ––––th street, the cook
and maid at his home—these are the readers who pass upon MSS. sent in to
the Hearthstone Magazine. If his pockets are not entirely emptied by the time
he reaches the bosom of his family the remaining ones are handed over to his
wife to read after the baby goes to sleep. A few days later the editor gathers in
the MSS. during his regular rounds and considers the verdict of his assorted
readers.
This system of making up a magazine has been very successful; and the
circulation, paced by the advertising rates, is making a wonderful record of
speed.
The Hearthstone Company also publishes books, and its imprint is to be found
on several successful works—all recommended, says the editor, by the
Hearthstone's army of volunteer readers. Now and then (according to talkative
members of the editorial staff) theHearthstone has allowed manuscripts to slip
through its fingers on the advice of its heterogeneous readers, that afterward

proved to be famous sellers when brought out by other houses.
For instance (the gossips say), "The Rise and Fall of Silas Latham" was
unfavourably passed upon by the elevator-man; the office-boy unanimously
rejected "The Boss"; "In the Bishop's Carriage" was contemptuously looked
upon by the street-car conductor; "The Deliverance" was turned down by a
clerk in the subscription department whose wife's mother had just begun a
two-months' visit at his home; "The Queen's Quair" came back from the
janitor with the comment: "So is the book."
But nevertheless the Hearthstone adheres to its theory and system, and it will
never lack volunteer readers; for each one of the widely scattered staff, from
the young lady stenographer in the editorial office to the man who shovels in
coal (whose adverse decision lost to the Hearthstone Company the manuscript
of "The Under World"), has expectations of becoming editor of the magazine
some day.
This method of the Hearthstone was well known to Allen Slayton when he
wrote his novelette entitled "Love Is All." Slayton had hung about the editorial
offices of all the magazines so persistently that he was acquainted with the
inner workings of every one in Gotham.
He knew not only that the editor of the Hearthstone handed his MSS. around
among different types of people for reading, but that the stories of sentimental
love-interest went to Miss Puffkin, the editor's stenographer. Another of the
editor's peculiar customs was to conceal invariably the name of the writer
from his readers of MSS. so that a glittering name might not influence the
sincerity of their reports.
Slayton made "Love Is All" the effort of his life. He gave it six months of the
best work of his heart and brain. It was a pure love-story, fine, elevated,
romantic, passionate—a prose poem that set the divine blessing of love (I am
transposing from the manuscript) high above all earthly gifts and honours, and
listed it in the catalogue of heaven's choicest rewards. Slayton's literary
ambition was intense. He would have sacrificed all other worldly possessions
to have gained fame in his chosen art. He would almost have cut off his right
hand, or have offered himself to the knife of the appendicitis fancier to have
realized his dream of seeing one of his efforts published in the Hearthstone.
Slayton finished "Love Is All," and took it to the Hearthstone in person. The
office of the magazine was in a large, conglomerate building, presided under
by a janitor.
As the writer stepped inside the door on his way to the elevator a potato
masher flew through the hall, wrecking Slayton's hat, and smashing the glass
of the door. Closely following in the wake of the utensil flew the janitor, a
bulky, unwholesome man, suspenderless and sordid, panic-stricken and

breathless. A frowsy, fat woman with flying hair followed the missile. The
janitor's foot slipped on the tiled floor, he fell in a heap with an exclamation of
despair. The woman pounced upon him and seized his hair. The man bellowed
lustily.
Her vengeance wreaked, the virago rose and stalked triumphant as Minerva,
back to some cryptic domestic retreat at the rear. The janitor got to his feet,
blown and humiliated.
"This is married life," he said to Slayton, with a certain bruised humour.
"That's the girl I used to lay awake of nights thinking about. Sorry about your
hat, mister. Say, don't snitch to the tenants about this, will yer? I don't want to
lose me job."
Slayton took the elevator at the end of the hall and went up to the offices of the
Hearthstone. He left the MS. of "Love Is All" with the editor, who agreed to
give him an answer as to its availability at the end of a week.
Slayton formulated his great winning scheme on his way down. It struck him
with one brilliant flash, and he could not refrain from admiring his own genius
in conceiving the idea. That very night he set about carrying it into execution.
Miss Puffkin, the Hearthstone stenographer, boarded in the same house with
the author. She was an oldish, thin, exclusive, languishing, sentimental maid;
and Slayton had been introduced to her some time before.
The writer's daring and self-sacrificing project was this: He knew that the
editor of the Hearthstone relied strongly upon Miss Puffkin's judgment in the
manuscript of romantic and sentimental fiction. Her taste represented the
immense average of mediocre women who devour novels and stories of that
type. The central idea and keynote of "Love Is All" was love at first sight—the
enrapturing,
irresistible, soul-thrilling feeling that compels a man or a woman to recognize
his or her spirit-mate as soon as heart speaks to heart. Suppose he should
impress this divine truth upon Miss Puffkin personally!—would she not surely
indorse her new and rapturous sensations by recommending highly to the
editor of the Hearthstone the novelette "Love Is All"?
Slayton thought so. And that night he took Miss Puffkin to the theatre. The
next night he made vehement love to her in the dim parlour of the boardinghouse. He quoted freely from "Love Is All"; and he wound up with Miss
Puffkin's head on his shoulder, and visions of literary fame dancing in his
head.
But Slayton did not stop at love-making. This, he said to himself, was the
turning point of his life; and, like a true sportsman, he "went the limit." On
Thursday night he and Miss Puffkin walked over to the Big Church in the

Middle of the Block and were married.
Brave Slayton! Châteaubriand died in a garret, Byron courted a widow, Keats
starved to death, Poe mixed his drinks, De Quincey hit the pipe, Ade lived in
Chicago, James kept on doing it, Dickens wore white socks, De Maupassant
wore a strait-jacket, Tom Watson became a Populist, Jeremiah wept, all these
authors did these things for the sake of literature, but thou didst cap them all;
thou marriedst a wife for to carve for thyself a niche in the temple of fame!
On Friday morning Mrs. Slayton said she would go over to the Hearthstone
office, hand in one or two manuscripts that the editor had given to her to read,
and resign her position as stenographer.
"Was there anything—er—that—er—you particularly fancied in the stories
you are going to turn in?" asked Slayton with a thumping heart.
"There was one—a novelette, that I liked so much," said his wife. "I haven't
read anything in years that I thought was half as nice and true to life."
That afternoon Slayton hurried down to the Hearthstone office. He felt that his
reward was close at hand. With a novelette in theHearthstone, literary
reputation would soon be his.
The office boy met him at the railing in the outer office. It was not for
unsuccessful authors to hold personal colloquy with the editor except at rare
intervals.
Slayton, hugging himself internally, was nursing in his heart the exquisite
hope of being able to crush the office boy with his forthcoming success.
He inquired concerning his novelette. The office boy went into the sacred
precincts and brought forth a large envelope, thick with more than the bulk of
a thousand checks.
"The boss told me to tell you he's sorry," said the boy, "but your manuscript
ain't available for the magazine."
Slayton stood, dazed. "Can you tell me," he stammered, "whether or no Miss
Puff—that is my—I mean Miss Puffkin—handed in a novelette this morning
that she had been asked to read?"
"Sure she did," answered the office boy wisely. "I heard the old man say that
Miss Puffkin said it was a daisy. The name of it was, 'Married for the Mazuma,
or a Working Girl's Triumph.'"
"Say, you!" said the office boy confidentially, "your name's Slayton, ain't it? I
guess I mixed cases on you without meanin' to do it. The boss give me some
manuscript to hand around the other day and I got the ones for Miss Puffkin
and the janitor mixed. I guess it's all right, though."
And then Slayton looked closer and saw on the cover of his manuscript, under

the title "Love Is All," the janitor's comment scribbled with a piece of
charcoal:
"The –––– you say!"

XIV
Twenty miles west of Tucson, the "Sunset Express" stopped at a tank to take
on water. Besides the aqueous addition the engine of that famous flyer
acquired some other things that were not good for it.
While the fireman was lowering the feeding hose, Bob Tidball, "Shark"
Dodson and a quarter-bred Creek Indian called John Big Dog climbed on the
engine and showed the engineer three round orifices in pieces of ordnance that
they carried. These orifices so impressed the engineer with their possibilities
that he raised both hands in a gesture such as accompanies the ejaculation "Do
tell!"
At the crisp command of Shark Dodson, who was leader of the attacking force
the engineer descended to the ground and uncoupled the engine and tender.
Then John Big Dog, perched upon the coal, sportively held two guns upon the
engine driver and the fireman, and suggested that they run the engine fifty
yards away and there await further orders.
Shark Dodson and Bob Tidball, scorning to put such low-grade ore as the
passengers through the mill, struck out for the rich pocket of the express car.
They found the messenger serene in the belief that the "Sunset Express" was
taking on nothing more stimulating and dangerous than aqua pura. While Bob
was knocking this idea out of his head with the butt-end of his six-shooter
Shark Dodson was already dosing the express-car safe with dynamite.
The safe exploded to the tune of $30,000, all gold and currency. The
passengers thrust their heads casually out of the windows to look for the
thunder-cloud. The conductor jerked at the bell-rope, which sagged down
loose and unresisting, at his tug. Shark Dodson and Bob Tidball, with their
booty in a stout canvas bag, tumbled out of the express car and ran awkwardly
in their high-heeled boots to the engine.
The engineer, sullenly angry but wise, ran the engine, according to orders,
rapidly away from the inert train. But before this was accomplished the
express messenger, recovered from Bob Tidball's persuader to neutrality,
jumped out of his car with a Winchester rifle and took a trick in the game. Mr.
John Big Dog, sitting on the coal tender, unwittingly made a wrong lead by
giving an imitation of a target, and the messenger trumped him. With a ball
exactly between his shoulder blades the Creek chevalier of industry rolled off

to the ground, thus increasing the share of his comrades in the loot by onesixth each.
Two miles from the tank the engineer was ordered to stop.
The robbers waved a defiant adieu and plunged down the steep slope into the
thick woods that lined the track. Five minutes of crashing through a thicket of
chaparral brought them to open woods, where three horses were tied to lowhanging branches. One was waiting for John Big Dog, who would never ride
by night or day again. This animal the robbers divested of saddle and bridle
and set free. They mounted the other two with the bag across one pommel, and
rode fast and with discretion through the forest and up a primeval, lonely
gorge. Here the animal that bore Bob Tidball slipped on a mossy boulder and
broke a foreleg. They shot him through the head at once and sat down to hold
a council of flight. Made secure for the present by the tortuous trail they had
travelled, the question of time was no longer so big. Many miles and hours lay
between them and the spryest posse that could follow. Shark Dodson's horse,
with trailing rope and dropped bridle, panted and cropped thankfully of the
grass along the stream in the gorge. Bob Tidball opened the sack, drew out
double handfuls of the neat packages of currency and the one sack of gold and
chuckled with the glee of a child.
"Say, you old double-decked pirate," he called joyfully to Dodson, "you said
we could do it—you got a head for financing that knocks the horns off of
anything in Arizona."
"What are we going to do about a hoss for you, Bob? We ain't got long to wait
here. They'll be on our trail before daylight in the mornin'."
"Oh, I guess that cayuse of yourn'll carry double for a while," answered the
sanguine Bob. "We'll annex the first animal we come across. By jingoes, we
made a haul, didn't we? Accordin' to the marks on this money there's $30,000
—$15,000 apiece!"
"It's short of what I expected," said Shark Dodson, kicking softly at the
packages with the toe of his boot. And then he looked pensively at the wet
sides of his tired horse.
"Old Bolivar's mighty nigh played out," he said, slowly. "I wish that sorrel of
yours hadn't got hurt."
"So do I," said Bob, heartily, "but it can't be helped. Bolivar's got plenty of
bottom—he'll get us both far enough to get fresh mounts. Dang it, Shark, I
can't help thinkin' how funny it is that an Easterner like you can come out here
and give us Western fellows cards and spades in the desperado business. What
part of the East was you from, anyway?"
"New York State," said Shark Dodson, sitting down on a boulder and chewing

a twig. "I was born on a farm in Ulster County. I ran away from home when I
was seventeen. It was an accident my coming West. I was walkin' along the
road with my clothes in a bundle, makin' for New York City. I had an idea of
goin' there and makin' lots of money. I always felt like I could do it. I came to
a place one evenin' where the road forked and I didn't know which fork to
take. I studied about it for half an hour, and then I took the left-hand. That
night I run into the camp of a Wild West show that was travellin' among the
little towns, and I went West with it. I've often wondered if I wouldn't have
turned out different if I'd took the other road."
"Oh, I reckon you'd have ended up about the same," said Bob Tidball,
cheerfully philosophical. "It ain't the roads we take; it's what's inside of us that
makes us turn out the way we do."
Shark Dodson got up and leaned against a tree.
"I'd a good deal rather that sorrel of yourn hadn't hurt himself, Bob," he said
again, almost pathetically.
"Same here," agreed Bob; "he was sure a first-rate kind of a crowbait. But
Bolivar, he'll pull us through all right. Reckon we'd better be movin' on, hadn't
we, Shark? I'll bag this boodle ag'in and we'll hit the trail for higher timber."
Bob Tidball replaced the spoil in the bag and tied the mouth of it tightly with a
cord. When he looked up the most prominent object that he saw was the
muzzle of Shark Dodson's .45 held upon him without a waver.
"Stop your funnin'," said Bob, with a grin. "We got to be hittin' the breeze."
"Set still," said Shark. "You ain't goin' to hit no breeze, Bob. I hate to tell you,
but there ain't any chance for but one of us. Bolivar, he's plenty tired, and he
can't carry double."
"We been pards, me and you, Shark Dodson, for three year," Bob said quietly.
"We've risked our lives together time and again. I've always give you a square
deal, and I thought you was a man. I've heard some queer stories about you
shootin' one or two men in a peculiar way, but I never believed 'em. Now if
you're just havin' a little fun with me, Shark, put your gun up, and we'll get on
Bolivar and vamose. If you mean to shoot—shoot, you blackhearted son of a
tarantula!"
Shark Dodson's face bore a deeply sorrowful look. "You don't know how bad I
feel," he sighed, "about that sorrel of yourn breakin' his leg, Bob."
The expression on Dodson's face changed in an instant to one of cold ferocity
mingled with inexorable cupidity. The soul of the man showed itself for a
moment like an evil face in the window of a reputable house.
Truly Bob Tidball was never to "hit the breeze" again. The deadly .45 of the
false friend cracked and filled the gorge with a roar that the walls hurled back

with indignant echoes. And Bolivar, unconscious accomplice, swiftly bore
away the last of the holders-up of the "Sunset Express," not put to the stress of
"carrying double."
But as "Shark" Dodson galloped away the woods seemed to fade from his
view; the revolver in his right hand turned to the curved arm of a mahogany
chair; his saddle was strangely upholstered, and he opened his eyes and saw
his feet, not in stirrups, but resting quietly on the edge of a quartered-oak desk.
I am telling you that Dodson, of the firm of Dodson & Decker, Wall Street
brokers, opened his eyes. Peabody, the confidential clerk, was standing by his
chair, hesitating to speak. There was a confused hum of wheels below, and the
sedative buzz of an electric fan.
"Ahem! Peabody," said Dodson, blinking. "I must have fallen asleep. I had a
most remarkable dream. What is it, Peabody?"
"Mr. Williams, sir, of Tracy & Williams, is outside. He has come to settle his
deal in X. Y. Z. The market caught him short, sir, if you remember."
"Yes, I remember. What is X. Y. Z. quoted at to-day, Peabody?"
"One eighty-five, sir."
"Then that's his price."
"Excuse me," said Peabody, rather nervously "for speaking of it, but I've been
talking to Williams. He's an old friend of yours, Mr. Dodson, and you
practically have a corner in X. Y. Z. I thought you might—that is, I thought
you might not remember that he sold you the stock at 98. If he settles at the
market price it will take every cent he has in the world and his home too to
deliver the shares."
The expression on Dodson's face changed in an instant to one of cold ferocity
mingled with inexorable cupidity. The soul of the man showed itself for a
moment like an evil face in the window of a reputable house.
"He will settle at one eighty-five," said Dodson. "Bolivar cannot carry
double."

XV
A BLACKJACK BARGAINER
The most disreputable thing in Yancey Goree's law office was Goree himself,
sprawled in his creaky old arm-chair. The rickety little office, built of red
brick, was set flush with the street—the main street of the town of Bethel.
Bethel rested upon the foot-hills of the Blue Ridge. Above it the mountains

were piled to the sky. Far below it the turbid Catawba gleamed yellow along
its disconsolate valley.
The June day was at its sultriest hour. Bethel dozed in the tepid shade. Trade
was not. It was so still that Goree, reclining in his chair, distinctly heard the
clicking of the chips in the grand-jury room, where the "court-house gang"
was playing poker. From the open back door of the office a well-worn path
meandered across the grassy lot to the court-house. The treading out of that
path had cost Goree all he ever had—first inheritance of a few thousand
dollars, next the old family home, and, latterly the last shreds of his selfrespect and manhood. The "gang" had cleaned him out. The broken gambler
had turned drunkard and parasite; he had lived to see this day come when the
men who had stripped him denied him a seat at the game. His word was no
longer to be taken. The daily bouts at cards had arranged itself accordingly,
and to him was assigned the ignoble part of the onlooker. The sheriff, the
county clerk, a sportive deputy, a gay attorney, and a chalk-faced man hailing
"from the valley," sat at table, and the sheared one was thus tacitly advised to
go and grow more wool.
Soon wearying of his ostracism, Goree had departed for his office, muttering
to himself as he unsteadily traversed the unlucky pathway. After a drink of
corn whiskey from a demijohn under the table, he had flung himself into the
chair, staring, in a sort of maudlin apathy, out at the mountains immersed in
the summer haze. The little white patch he saw away up on the side of
Blackjack was Laurel, the village near which he had been born and bred.
There, also, was the birthplace of the feud between the Gorees and the
Coltranes. Now no direct heir of the Gorees survived except this plucked and
singed bird of misfortune. To the Coltranes, also, but one male supporter was
left—Colonel Abner Coltrane, a man of substance and standing, a member of
the State Legislature, and a contemporary with Goree's father. The feud had
been a typical one of the region; it had left a red record of hate, wrong and
slaughter.
But Yancey Goree was not thinking of feuds. His befuddled brain was
hopelessly attacking the problem of the future maintenance of himself and his
favourite follies. Of late, old friends of the family had seen to it that he had
whereof to eat and a place to sleep—but whiskey they would not buy for him,
and he must have whiskey. His law business was extinct; no case had been
intrusted to him in two years. He had been a borrower and a sponge, and it
seemed that if he fell no lower it would be from lack of opportunity. One more
chance—he was saying to himself—if he had one more stake at the game, he
thought he could win; but he had nothing left to sell, and his credit was more
than exhausted.
He could not help smiling, even in his misery, as he thought of the man to

whom, six months before, he had sold the old Goree homestead. There had
come from "back yan'" in the mountains two of the strangest creatures, a man
named Pike Garvey and his wife. "Back yan'," with a wave of the hand toward
the hills, was understood among the mountaineers to designate the remotest
fastnesses, the unplumbed gorges, the haunts of lawbreakers, the wolf's den,
and the boudoir of the bear. In the cabin far up on Blackjack's shoulder, in the
wildest part of these retreats, this odd couple had lived for twenty years. They
had neither dog nor children to mitigate the heavy silence of the hills. Pike
Garvey was little known in the settlements, but all who had dealt with him
pronounced him "crazy as a loon." He acknowledged no occupation save that
of a squirrel hunter, but he "moonshined" occasionally by way of diversion.
Once the "revenues" had dragged him from his lair, fighting silently and
desperately like a terrier, and he had been sent to state's prison for two years.
Released, he popped back into his hole like an angry weasel.
Fortune, passing over many anxious wooers, made a freakish flight into
Blackjack's bosky pockets to smile upon Pike and his faithful partner.
One day a party of spectacled, knickerbockered, and altogether absurd
prospectors invaded the vicinity of the Garvey's cabin. Pike lifted his squirrel
rifle off the hooks and took a shot at them at long range on the chance of their
being revenues. Happily he missed, and the unconscious agents of good luck
drew nearer, disclosing their innocence of anything resembling law or justice.
Later on, they offered the Garveys an enormous quantity of ready, green, crisp
money for their thirty-acre patch of cleared land, mentioning, as an excuse for
such a mad action, some irrelevant and inadequate nonsense about a bed of
mica underlying the said property.
When the Garveys became possessed of so many dollars that they faltered in
computing them, the deficiencies of life on Blackjack began to grow
prominent. Pike began to talk of new shoes, a hogshead of tobacco to set in the
corner, a new lock to his rifle; and, leading Martella to a certain spot on the
mountain-side, he pointed out to her how a small cannon—doubtless a thing
not beyond the scope of their fortune in price—might be planted so as to
command and defend the sole accessible trail to the cabin, to the confusion of
revenues and meddling strangers forever.
But Adam reckoned without his Eve. These things represented to him the
applied power of wealth, but there slumbered in his dingy cabin an ambition
that soared far above his primitive wants. Somewhere in Mrs. Garvey's bosom
still survived a spot of femininity unstarved by twenty years of Blackjack. For
so long a time the sounds in her ears had been the scaly-barks dropping in the
woods at noon, and the wolves singing among the rocks at night, and it was
enough to have purged her of vanities. She had grown fat and sad and yellow
and dull. But when the means came, she felt a rekindled desire to assume the

perquisites of her sex—to sit at tea tables; to buy futile things; to whitewash
the hideous veracity of life with a little form and ceremony. So she coldly
vetoed Pike's proposed system of fortifications, and announced that they
would descend upon the world, and gyrate socially.
And thus, at length, it was decided, and the thing done. The village of Laurel
was their compromise between Mrs. Garvey's preference for one of the large
valley towns and Pike's hankering for primeval solitudes. Laurel yielded a
halting round of feeble social distractions comportable with Martella's
ambitions, and was not entirely without recommendation to Pike, its contiguity
to the mountains presenting advantages for sudden retreat in case fashionable
society should make it advisable.
Their descent upon Laurel had been coincident with Yancey Goree's feverish
desire to convert property into cash, and they bought the old Goree homestead,
paying four thousand dollars ready money into the spendthrift's shaking hands.
Thus it happened that while the disreputable last of the Gorees sprawled in his
disreputable office, at the end of his row, spurned by the cronies whom he had
gorged, strangers dwelt in the halls of his fathers.
A cloud of dust was rolling, slowly up the parched street, with something
travelling in the midst of it. A little breeze wafted the cloud to one side, and a
new, brightly painted carryall, drawn by a slothful gray horse, became visible.
The vehicle deflected from the middle of the street as it neared Goree's office,
and stopped in the gutter directly in front of his door.
On the front seat sat a gaunt, tall man, dressed in black broadcloth, his rigid
hands incarcerated in yellow kid gloves. On the back seat was a lady who
triumphed over the June heat. Her stout form was armoured in a skin-tight silk
dress of the description known as "changeable," being a gorgeous combination
of shifting hues. She sat erect, waving a much-ornamented fan, with her eyes
fixed stonily far down the street. However Martella Garvey's heart might be
rejoicing at the pleasures of her new life, Blackjack had done his work with
her exterior. He had carved her countenance to the image of emptiness and
inanity; had imbued her with the stolidity of his crags, and the reserve of his
hushed interiors. She always seemed to hear, whatever her surroundings were,
the scaly-barks falling and pattering down the mountain-side. She could
always hear the awful silence of Blackjack sounding through the stillest of
nights.
Goree watched this solemn equipage, as it drove to his door, with only faint
interest; but when the lank driver wrapped the reins about his whip,
awkwardly descended, and stepped into the office, he rose unsteadily to
receive him, recognizing Pike Garvey, the new, the transformed, the recently
civilized.

The mountaineer took the chair Goree offered him. They who cast doubts
upon Garvey's soundness of mind had a strong witness in the man's
countenance. His face was too long, a dull saffron in hue, and immobile as a
statue's. Pale-blue, unwinking round eyes without lashes added to the
singularity of his gruesome visage. Goree was at a loss to account for the visit.
"Everything all right at Laurel, Mr. Garvey?" he inquired.
"Everything all right, sir, and mighty pleased is Missis Garvey and me with the
property. Missis Garvey likes yo' old place, and she likes the neighbourhood.
Society is what she 'lows she wants, and she is gettin' of it. The Rogerses, the
Hapgoods, the Pratts and the Troys hev been to see Missis Garvey, and she
hev et meals to most of thar houses. The best folks hev axed her to differ'nt
kinds of doin's. I cyan't say, Mr. Goree, that sech things suits me—fur me, give
me them thar." Garvey's huge, yellow-gloved hand flourished in the direction
of the mountains. "That's whar I b'long, 'mongst the wild honey bees and the
b'ars. But that ain't what I come fur to say, Mr. Goree. Thar's somethin' you got
what me and Missis Garvey wants to buy."
"Buy!" echoed Goree. "From me?" Then he laughed harshly. "I reckon you are
mistaken about that. I reckon you are mistaken about that. I sold out to you, as
you yourself expressed it, 'lock, stock and barrel.' There isn't even a ramrod
left to sell."
"You've got it; and we 'uns want it. 'Take the money,' says Missis Garvey, 'and
buy it fa'r and squar'.'"
Goree shook his head. "The cupboard's bare," he said.
"We've riz," pursued the mountaineer, undeflected from his object, "a heap.
We was pore as possums, and now we could hev folks to dinner every day. We
been recognized, Missis Garvey says, by the best society. But there's somethin'
we need we ain't got. She says it ought to been put in the 'ventory ov the sale,
but it tain't thar. 'Take the money, then,' says she, 'and buy it fa'r and squar'."'
"Out with it," said Goree, his racked nerves growing impatient.
Garvey threw his slouch hat upon the table, and leaned forward, fixing his
unblinking eyes upon Goree's.
"There's a old feud," he said distinctly and slowly, "'tween you 'uns and the
Coltranes."
Goree frowned ominously. To speak of his feud to a feudist is a serious breach
of the mountain etiquette. The man from "back yan'" knew it as well as the
lawyer did.
"Na offense," he went on "but purely in the way of business. Missis Garvey
hev studied all about feuds. Most of the quality folks in the mountains hev
'em. The Settles and the Goforths, the Rankins and the Boyds, the Silers and

the Galloways, hev all been cyarin' on feuds f'om twenty to a hundred year.
The last man to drap was when yo' uncle, Jedge Paisley Goree, 'journed co't
and shot Len Coltrane f'om the bench. Missis Garvey and me, we come f'om
the po' white trash. Nobody wouldn't pick a feud with we 'uns, no mo'n with a
fam'ly of tree-toads. Quality people everywhar, says Missis Garvey, has feuds.
We 'uns ain't quality, but we're buyin' into it as fur as we can. 'Take the money,
then,' says Missis Garvey, 'and buy Mr. Goree's feud, fa'r and squar'.'"
The squirrel hunter straightened a leg half across the room, drew a roll of bills
from his pocket, and threw them on the table.
"Thar's two hundred dollars, Mr. Goree; what you would call a fa'r price for a
feud that's been 'lowed to run down like yourn hev. Thar's only you left to
cyar' on yo' side of it, and you'd make mighty po' killin'. I'll take it off yo'
hands, and it'll set me and Missis Garvey up among the quality. Thar's the
money."
The little roll of currency on the table slowly untwisted itself, writhing and
jumping as its folds relaxed. In the silence that followed Garvey's last speech
the rattling of the poker chips in the court-house could be plainly heard. Goree
knew that the sheriff had just won a pot, for the subdued whoop with which he
always greeted a victory floated across the square upon the crinkly heat waves.
Beads of moisture stood on Goree's brow. Stooping, he drew the wickercovered demijohn from under the table, and filled a tumbler from it.
"A little corn liquor, Mr. Garvey? Of course you are joking about—what you
spoke of? Opens quite a new market, doesn't it? Feuds. Prime, two-fifty to
three. Feuds, slightly damaged—two hundred, I believe you said, Mr.
Garvey?"
Goree laughed self-consciously.
The mountaineer took the glass Goree handed him, and drank the whisky
without a tremor of the lids of his staring eyes. The lawyer applauded the feat
by a look of envious admiration. He poured his own drink, and took it like a
drunkard, by gulps, and with shudders at the smell and taste.
"Two hundred," repeated Garvey. "Thar's the money."
A sudden passion flared up in Goree's brain. He struck the table with his fist.
One of the bills flipped over and touched his hand. He flinched as if something
had stung him.
"Do you come to me," he shouted, "seriously with such a ridiculous, insulting,
darned-fool proposition?"
"It's fa'r and squar'," said the squirrel hunter, but he reached out his hand as if
to take back the money; and then Goree knew that his own flurry of rage had
not been from pride or resentment, but from anger at himself, knowing that he

would set foot in the deeper depths that were being opened to him. He turned
in an instant from an outraged gentleman to an anxious chafferer
recommending his goods.
"Don't be in a hurry, Garvey," he said, his face crimson and his speech thick. "I
accept your p-p-proposition, though it's dirt cheap at two hundred. A t-trade's
all right when both p-purchaser and b-buyer are s-satisfied. Shall I w-wrap it
up for you, Mr. Garvey?"
Garvey rose, and shook out his broadcloth. "Missis Garvey will be pleased.
You air out of it, and it stands Coltrane and Garvey. Just a scrap ov writin', Mr.
Goree, you bein' a lawyer, to show we traded."
Goree seized a sheet of paper and a pen. The money was clutched in his moist
hand. Everything else suddenly seemed to grow trivial and light.
"Bill of sale, by all means. 'Right, title, and interest in and to' . . . 'forever
warrant and—' No, Garvey, we'll have to leave out that 'defend,'" said Goree
with a loud laugh. "You'll have to defend this title yourself."
The mountaineer received the amazing screed that the lawyer handed him,
folded it with immense labour, and laced it carefully in his pocket.
Goree was standing near the window. "Step here," he said, raising his finger,
"and I'll show you your recently purchased enemy. There he goes, down the
other side of the street."
The mountaineer crooked his long frame to look through the window in the
direction indicated by the other. Colonel Abner Coltrane, an erect, portly
gentleman of about fifty, wearing the inevitable long, double-breasted frock
coat of the Southern lawmaker, and an old high silk hat, was passing on the
opposite sidewalk. As Garvey looked, Goree glanced at his face. If there be
such a thing as a yellow wolf, here was its counterpart. Garvey snarled as his
unhuman eyes followed the moving figure, disclosing long, amber-coloured
fangs.
"Is that him? Why, that's the man who sent me to the pen'tentiary once!"
"He used to be district attorney," said Goree carelessly. "And, by the way, he's
a first-class shot."
"I kin hit a squirrel's eye at a hundred yard," said Garvey. "So that thar's
Coltrane! I made a better trade than I was thinkin'. I'll take keer ov this feud,
Mr. Goree, better'n you ever did!"
He moved toward the door, but lingered there, betraying a slight perplexity.
"Anything else to-day?" inquired Goree with frothy sarcasm. "Any family
traditions, ancestral ghosts, or skeletons in the closet? Prices as low as the
lowest."

"Thar was another thing," replied the unmoved squirrel hunter, "that Missis
Garvey was thinkin' of. 'Tain't so much in my line as t'other, but she wanted
partic'lar that I should inquire, and ef you was willin', 'pay fur it,' she says, 'fa'r
and squar'.' Thar's a buryin' groun', as you know, Mr. Goree, in the yard of yo'
old place, under the cedars. Them that lies thar is yo' folks what was killed by
the Coltranes. The monyments has the names on 'em. Missis Garvey says a
fam'ly buryin' groun' is a sho' sign of quality. She says ef we git the feud, thar's
somethin' else ought to go with it. The names on them monyments is 'Goree,'
but they can be changed to ourn by—"
"Go! Go!" screamed Goree, his face turning purple. He stretched out both
hands toward the mountaineer, his fingers hooked and shaking. "Go, you
ghoul! Even a Ch-Chinaman protects the g-graves of his ancestors—go!"
The squirrel hunter slouched out of the door to his carryall. While he was
climbing over the wheel Goree was collecting, with feverish celerity, the
money that had fallen from his hand to the floor. As the vehicle slowly turned
about, the sheep, with a coat of newly grown wool, was hurrying, in indecent
haste, along the path to the court-house.
At three o'clock in the morning they brought him back to his office, shorn and
unconscious. The sheriff, the sportive deputy, the county clerk, and the gay
attorney carried him, the chalk-faced man "from the valley" acting as escort.
"On the table," said one of them, and they deposited him there among the litter
of his unprofitable books and papers.
"Yance thinks a lot of a pair of deuces when he's liquored up," sighed the
sheriff reflectively.
"Too much," said the gay attorney. "A man has no business to play poker who
drinks as much as he does. I wonder how much he dropped to-night."
"Close to two hundred. What I wonder is whar he got it. Yance ain't had a cent
fur over a month, I know."
"Struck a client, maybe. Well, let's get home before daylight. He'll be all right
when he wakes up, except for a sort of beehive about the cranium."
The gang slipped away through the early morning twilight. The next eye to
gaze upon the miserable Goree was the orb of day. He peered through the
uncurtained window, first deluging the sleeper in a flood of faint gold, but
soon pouring upon the mottled red of his flesh a searching, white, summer
heat. Goree stirred, half unconsciously, among the table's débris, and turned
his face from the window. His movement dislodged a heavy law book, which
crashed upon the floor. Opening his eyes, he saw, bending over him, a man in
a black frock coat. Looking higher, he discovered a well-worn silk hat, and
beneath it the kindly, smooth face of Colonel Abner Coltrane.

A little uncertain of the outcome, the colonel waited for the other to make
some sign of recognition. Not in twenty years had male members of these two
families faced each other in peace. Goree's eyelids puckered as he strained his
blurred sight toward this visitor, and then he smiled serenely.
"Have you brought Stella and Lucy over to play?" he said calmly.
"Do you know me, Yancey?" asked Coltrane.
"Of course I do. You brought me a whip with a whistle in the end."
So he had—twenty-four years ago; when Yancey's father was his best friend.
Goree's eyes wandered about the room. The colonel understood. "Lie still, and
I'll bring you some," said he. There was a pump in the yard at the rear, and
Goree closed his eyes, listening with rapture to the click of its handle, and the
bubbling of the falling stream. Coltrane brought a pitcher of the cool water,
and held it for him to drink. Presently Goree sat up—a most forlorn object, his
summer suit of flax soiled and crumpled, his discreditable head tousled and
unsteady. He tried to wave one of his hands toward the colonel.
"Ex-excuse—everything, will you?" he said. "I must have drunk too much
whiskey last night, and gone to bed on the table." His brows knitted into a
puzzled frown.
"Out with the boys awhile?" asked Coltrane kindly.
"No, I went nowhere. I haven't had a dollar to spend in the last two months.
Struck the demijohn too often, I reckon, as usual."
Colonel Coltrane touched him on the shoulder.
"A little while ago, Yancey," he began, "you asked me if I had brought Stella
and Lucy over to play. You weren't quite awake then, and must have been
dreaming you were a boy again. You are awake now, and I want you to listen
to me. I have come from Stella and Lucy to their old playmate, and to my old
friend's son. They know that I am going to bring you home with me, and you
will find them as ready with a welcome as they were in the old days. I want
you to come to my house and stay until you are yourself again, and as much
longer as you will. We heard of your being down in the world, and in the midst
of temptation, and we agreed that you should come over and play at our house
once more. Will you come, my boy? Will you drop our old family trouble and
come with me?"
"Trouble!" said Goree, opening his eyes wide. "There was never any trouble
between us that I know of. I'm sure we've always been the best friends. But,
good Lord, Colonel, how could I go to your home as I am—a drunken wretch,
a miserable, degraded spendthrift and gambler—"
He lurched from the table into his armchair, and began to weep maudlin tears,

mingled with genuine drops of remorse and shame. Coltrane talked to him
persistently and reasonably, reminding him of the simple mountain pleasures
of which he had once been so fond, and insisting upon the genuineness of the
invitation.
Finally he landed Goree by telling him he was counting upon his help in the
engineering and transportation of a large amount of felled timber from a high
mountain-side to a waterway. He knew that Goree had once invented a device
for this purpose—a series of slides and chutes upon which he had justly prided
himself. In an instant the poor fellow, delighted at the idea of his being of use
to any one, had paper spread upon the table, and was drawing rapid but
pitifully shaky lines in demonstration of what he could and would do.
The man was sickened of the husks; his prodigal heart was turning again
toward the mountains. His mind was yet strangely clogged, and his thoughts
and memories were returning to his brain one by one, like carrier pigeons over
a stormy sea. But Coltrane was satisfied with the progress he had made.
Bethel received the surprise of its existence that afternoon when a Coltrane
and a Goree rode amicably together through the town. Side by side they rode,
out from the dusty streets and gaping townspeople, down across the creek
bridge, and up toward the mountain. The prodigal had brushed and washed
and combed himself to a more decent figure, but he was unsteady in the
saddle, and he seemed to be deep in the contemplation of some vexing
problem. Coltrane left him in his mood, relying upon the influence of changed
surroundings to restore his equilibrium.
Once Goree was seized with a shaking fit, and almost came to a collapse. He
had to dismount and rest at the side of the road. The colonel, foreseeing such a
condition, had provided a small flask of whisky for the journey but when it
was offered to him Goree refused it almost with violence, declaring he would
never touch it again. By and by he was recovered, and went quietly enough for
a mile or two. Then he pulled up his horse suddenly, and said:
"I lost two hundred dollars last night, playing poker. Now, where did I get that
money?"
"Take it easy, Yancey. The mountain air will soon clear it up. We'll go fishing,
first thing, at the Pinnacle Falls. The trout are jumping there like bullfrogs.
We'll take Stella and Lucy along, and have a picnic on Eagle Rock. Have you
forgotten how a hickory-cured-ham sandwich tastes, Yancey, to a hungry
fisherman?"
Evidently the colonel did not believe the story of his lost wealth; so Goree
retired again into brooding silence.
By late Afternoon they had travelled ten of the twelve miles between Bethel
and Laurel. Half a mile this side of Laurel lay the old Goree place; a mile or

two beyond the village lived the Coltranes. The road was now steep and
laborious, but the compensations were many. The tilted aisles of the forest
were opulent with leaf and bird and bloom. The tonic air put to shame the
pharmacopæia. The glades were dark with mossy shade, and bright with shy
rivulets winking from the ferns and laurels. On the lower side they viewed,
framed in the near foliage, exquisite sketches of the far valley swooning in its
opal haze.
Coltrane was pleased to see that his companion was yielding to the spell of the
hills and woods. For now they had but to skirt the base of Painter's Cliff; to
cross Elder Branch and mount the hill beyond, and Goree would have to face
the squandered home of his fathers. Every rock he passed, every tree, every
foot of the rocky way, was familiar to him. Though he had forgotten the
woods, they thrilled him like the music of "Home, Sweet Home."
They rounded the cliff, descended into Elder Branch, and paused there to let
the horses drink and splash in the swift water. On the right was a rail fence that
cornered there, and followed the road and stream. Inclosed by it was the old
apple orchard of the home place; the house was yet concealed by the brow of
the steep hill. Inside and along the fence, pokeberries, elders, sassafras, and
sumac grew high and dense. At a rustle of their branches, both Goree and
Coltrane glanced up, and saw a long, yellow, wolfish face above the fence,
staring at them with pale, unwinking eyes. The head quickly disappeared;
there was a violent swaying of the bushes, and an ungainly figure ran up
through the apple orchard in the direction of the house, zig-zagging among the
trees.
"That's Garvey," said Coltrane; "the man you sold out to. There's no doubt but
he's considerably cracked. I had to send him up for moonshining once, several
years ago, in spite of the fact that I believed him irresponsible. Why, what's the
matter, Yancey?"
Goree was wiping his forehead, and his face had lost its colour. "Do I look
queer, too?" he asked, trying to smile. "I'm just remembering a few more
things." Some of the alcohol had evaporated from his brain. "I recollect now
where I got that two hundred dollars."
"Don't think of it," said Coltrane cheerfully. "Later on we'll figure it all out
together."
They rode out of the branch, and when they reached the foot of the hill Goree
stopped again.
"Did you ever suspect I was a very vain kind of fellow, Colonel?" he asked.
"Sort of foolish proud about appearances?"
The colonel's eyes refused to wander to the soiled, sagging suit of flax and the
faded slouch hat.

"It seems to me," he replied, mystified, but humouring him, "I remember a
young buck about twenty, with the tightest coat, the sleekest hair, and the
prancingest saddle horse in the Blue Ridge."
"Right you are," said Goree eagerly. "And it's in me yet, though it don't show.
Oh, I'm as vain as a turkey gobbler, and as proud as Lucifer. I'm going to ask
you to indulge this weakness of mine in a little matter."
"Speak out, Yancey. We'll create you Duke of Laurel and Baron of Blue Ridge,
if you choose; and you shall have a feather out of Stella's peacock's tail to
wear in your hat."
"I'm in earnest. In a few minutes we'll pass the house up there on the hill
where I was born, and where my people have lived for nearly a century.
Strangers live there now—and look at me! I am about to show myself to them
ragged and poverty-stricken, a wastrel and a beggar. Colonel Coltrane, I'm
ashamed to do it. I want you to let me wear your coat and hat until we are out
of sight beyond. I know you think it a foolish pride, but I want to make as
good a showing as I can when I pass the old place."
"Now, what does this mean?" said Coltrane to himself, as he compared his
companion's sane looks and quiet demeanour with his strange request. But he
was already unbuttoning the coat, assenting readily, as if the fancy were in no
wise to be considered strange.
The coat and hat fitted Goree well. He buttoned the former about him with a
look of satisfaction and dignity. He and Coltrane were nearly the same size—
rather tall, portly, and erect. Twenty-five years were between them, but in
appearance they might have been brothers. Goree looked older than his age;
his face was puffy and lined; the colonel had the smooth, fresh complexion of
a temperate liver. He put on Goree's disreputable old flax coat and faded
slouch hat.
"Now," said Goree, taking up the reins, "I'm all right. I want you to ride about
ten feet in the rear as we go by, Colonel, so that they can get a good look at
me. They'll see I'm no back number yet, by any means. I guess I'll show up
pretty well to them once more, anyhow. Let's ride on."
He set out up the hill at a smart trot, the colonel following, as he had been
requested.
Goree sat straight in the saddle, with head erect, but his eyes were turned to
the right, sharply scanning every shrub and fence and hiding-place in the old
homestead yard. Once he muttered to himself, "Will the crazy fool try it, or did
I dream half of it?"
It was when he came opposite the little family burying ground that he saw
what he had been looking for—a puff of white smoke, coming from the thick

cedars in one corner. He toppled so slowly to the left that Coltrane had time to
urge his horse to that side, and catch him with one arm.
The squirrel hunter had not overpraised his aim. He had sent the bullet where
he intended, and where Goree had expected that it would pass—through the
breast of Colonel Abner Coltrane's black frock coat.
Goree leaned heavily against Coltrane, but he did not fall. The horses kept
pace, side by side, and the Colonel's arm kept him steady. The little white
houses of Laurel shone through the trees, half a mile away. Goree reached out
one hand and groped until it rested upon Coltrane's fingers, which held his
bridle.
"Good friend," he said, and that was all.
Thus did Yancey Goree, as he rode past his old home, make, considering all
things, the best showing that was in his power.

XVI
THE SONG AND THE SERGEANT
Half a dozen people supping at a table in one of the upper-Broadway all-night
restaurants were making too much noise. Three times the manager walked past
them with a politely warning glance; but their argument had waxed too warm
to be quelled by a manager's gaze. It was midnight, and the restaurant was
filled with patrons from the theatres of that district. Some among the dispersed
audiences must have recognized among the quarrelsome sextet the faces of the
players belonging to the Carroll Comedy Company.
Four of the six made up the company. Another was the author of the
comedietta, "A Gay Coquette," which the quartette of players had been
presenting with fair success at several vaudeville houses in the city. The sixth
at the table was a person inconsequent in the realm of art, but one at whose
bidding many lobsters had perished.
Loudly the six maintained their clamorous debate. No one of the Party was
silent except when answers were stormed from him by the excited ones. That
was the comedian of "A Gay Coquette." He was a young man with a face even
too melancholy for his profession.
The oral warfare of four immoderate tongues was directed at Miss Clarice
Carroll, the twinkling star of the small aggregation. Excepting the downcast
comedian, all members of the party united in casting upon her with vehemence
the blame of some momentous misfortune. Fifty times they told her: "It is your
fault, Clarice—it is you alone who spoilt the scene. It is only of late that you

have acted this way. At this rate the sketch will have to be taken off."
Miss Carroll was a match for any four. Gallic ancestry gave her a vivacity that
could easily mount to fury. Her large eyes flashed a scorching denial at her
accusers. Her slender, eloquent arms constantly menaced the tableware. Her
high, clear soprano voice rose to what would have been a scream had it not
possessed so pure a musical quality. She hurled back at the attacking four their
denunciations in tones sweet, but of too great carrying power for a Broadway
restaurant.
Finally they exhausted her patience both as a woman and an artist. She sprang
up like a panther, managed to smash half a dozen plates and glasses with one
royal sweep of her arm, and defied her critics. They rose and wrangled more
loudly. The comedian sighed and looked a trifle sadder and disinterested. The
manager came tripping and suggested peace. He was told to go to the popular
synonym for war so promptly that the affair might have happened at The
Hague.
Thus was the manager angered. He made a sign with his hand and a waiter
slipped out of the door. In twenty minutes the party of six was in a police
station facing a grizzled and philosophical desk sergeant.
"Disorderly conduct in a restaurant," said the policeman who had brought the
party in.
The author of "A Gay Coquette" stepped to the front. He wore nose-glasses
and evening clothes, even if his shoes had been tans before they met the
patent-leather-polish bottle.
"Mr. Sergeant," said he, out of his throat, like Actor Irving, "I would like to
protest against this arrest. The company of actors who are performing in a
little play that I have written, in company with a friend and myself were
having a little supper. We became deeply interested in the discussion as to
which one of the cast is responsible for a scene in the sketch that lately has
fallen so flat that the piece is about to become a failure. We may have been
rather noisy and intolerant of interruption by the restaurant people; but the
matter was of considerable importance to all of us. You see that we are sober
and are not the kind of people who desire to raise disturbances. I hope that the
case will not be pressed and that we may be allowed to go."
"Who makes the charge?" asked the sergeant.
"Me," said a white-aproned voice in the rear. "De restaurant sent me to. De
gang was raisin' a rough-house and breakin' dishes."
"The dishes were paid for," said the playwright. "They were not broken
purposely. In her anger, because we remonstrated with her for spoiling the
scene, Miss—"

"It's not true, sergeant," cried the clear voice of Miss Clarice Carroll. In a long
coat of tan silk and a red-plumed hat, she bounded before the desk.
"It's not my fault," she cried indignantly. "How dare they say such a thing! I've
played the title rôle ever since it was staged, and if you want to know who
made it a success, ask the public—that's all."
"What Miss Carroll says is true in part," said the author. "For five months the
comedietta was a drawing-card in the best houses. But during the last two
weeks it has lost favour. There is one scene in it in which Miss Carroll made a
big hit. Now she hardly gets a hand out of it. She spoils it by acting it entirely
different from her old way."
"It is not my fault," reiterated the actress.
"There are only two of you on in the scene," argued the playwright hotly, "you
and Delmars, here—"
"Then it's his fault," declared Miss Carroll, with a lightning glance of scorn
from her dark eyes. The comedian caught it, and gazed with increased
melancholy at the panels of the sergeant's desk.
The night was a dull one in that particular police station.
The sergeant's long-blunted curiosity awoke a little.
"I've heard you," he said to the author. And then he addressed the thin-faced
and ascetic-looking lady of the company who played "Aunt Turnip-top" in the
little comedy.
"Who do you think spoils the scene you are fussing about?" he asked.
"I'm no knocker," said that lady, "and everybody knows it. So, when I say that
Clarice falls down every time in that scene I'm judging her art and not herself.
She was great in it once. She does it something fierce now. It'll dope the show
if she keeps it up."
The sergeant looked at the comedian.
"You and the lady have this scene together, I understand. I suppose there's no
use asking you which one of you queers it?"
The comedian avoided the direct rays from the two fixed stars of Miss
Carroll's eyes.
"I don't know," he said, looking down at his patent-leather toes.
"Are you one of the actors?" asked the sergeant of a dwarfish youth with a
middle-aged face.
"Why, say!" replied the last Thespian witness, "you don't notice any tin spear
in my hands, do you? You haven't heard me shout: 'See, the Emperor comes!'
since I've been in here, have you? I guess I'm on the stage long enough for 'em

not to start a panic by mistaking me for a thin curl of smoke rising above the
footlights."
"In your opinion, if you've got one," said the sergeant, "is the frost that gathers
on the scene in question the work of the lady or the gentleman who takes part
in it?"
The middle-aged youth looked pained.
"I regret to say," he answered, "that Miss Carroll seems to have lost her grip
on that scene. She's all right in the rest of the play, but—but I tell you,
sergeant, she can do it—she has done it equal to any of 'em—and she can do it
again."
Miss Carroll ran forward, glowing and palpitating.
"Thank you, Jimmy, for the first good word I've had in many a day," she cried.
And then she turned her eager face toward the desk.
"I'll show you, sergeant, whether I am to blame. I'll show them whether I can
do that scene. Come, Mr. Delmars; let us begin. You will let us, won't you,
sergeant?"
"How long will it take?" asked the sergeant, dubiously.
"Eight minutes," said the playwright. "The entire play consumes but thirty."
"You may go ahead," said the sergeant. "Most of you seem to side against the
little lady. Maybe she had a right to crack up a saucer or two in that restaurant.
We'll see how she does the turn before we take that up."
The matron of the police station had been standing near, listening to the
singular argument. She came nigher and stood near the sergeant's chair. Two
or three of the reserves strolled in, big and yawning.
"Before beginning the scene," said the playwright, "and assuming that you
have not seen a production of 'A Gay Coquette,' I will make a brief but
necessary explanation. It is a musical-farce-comedy—burlesque-comedietta.
As the title implies, Miss Carroll's rôle is that of a gay, rollicking,
mischievous, heartless coquette. She sustains that character throughout the
entire comedy part of the production. And I have designed the extravaganza
features so that she may preserve and present the same coquettish idea.
"Now, the scene in which we take exception to Miss Carroll's acting is called
the 'gorilla dance.' She is costumed to represent a wood nymph, and there is a
great song-and-dance scene with a gorilla—played by Mr. Delmars, the
comedian. A tropical-forest stage is set.
"That used to get four and five recalls. The main thing was the acting and the
dance—it was the funniest thing in New York for five months. Delmars's song,
'I'll Woo Thee to My Sylvan Home,' while he and Miss Carroll were cutting

hide-and-seek capers among the tropical plants, was a winner."
"What's the trouble with the scene now?" asked the sergeant.
"Miss Carroll spoils it right in the middle of it," said the playwright wrathfully.
With a wide gesture of her ever-moving arms the actress waved back the little
group of spectators, leaving a space in front of the desk for the scene of her
vindication or fall. Then she whipped off her long tan cloak and tossed it
across the arm of the policeman who still stood officially among them.
Miss Carroll had gone to supper well cloaked, but in the costume of the tropic
wood nymph. A skirt of fern leaves touched her knee; she was like a
humming-bird—green and golden and purple.
And then she danced a fluttering, fantastic dance, so agile and light and mazy
in her steps that the other three members of the Carroll Comedy Company
broke into applause at the art of it.
And at the proper time Delmars leaped out at her side, mimicking the uncouth,
hideous bounds of the gorilla so funnily that the grizzled sergeant himself gave
a short laugh like the closing of a padlock. They danced together the gorilla
dance, and won a hand from all.
Then began the most fantastic part of the scene—the wooing of the nymph by
the gorilla. It was a kind of dance itself—eccentric and prankish, with the
nymph in coquettish and seductive retreat, followed by the gorilla as he sang
"I'll Woo Thee to My Sylvan Home."
The song was a lyric of merit. The words were non-sense, as befitted the play,
but the music was worthy of something better. Delmars struck into it in a rich
tenor that owned a quality that shamed the flippant words.
During one verse of the song the wood nymph performed the grotesque
evolutions designed for the scene. At the middle of the second verse she stood
still, with a strange look on her face, seeming to gaze dreamily into the depths
of the scenic forest. The gorilla's last leap had brought him to her feet, and
there he knelt, holding her hand, until he had finished the haunting-lyric that
was set in the absurd comedy like a diamond in a piece of putty.
When Delmars ceased Miss Carroll started, and covered a sudden flow of tears
with both hands.
"There!" cried the playwright, gesticulating with violence; "there you have it,
sergeant. For two weeks she has spoiled that scene in just that manner at every
performance. I have begged her to consider that it is not Ophelia or Juliet that
she is playing. Do you wonder now at our impatience? Tears for the gorilla
song! The play is lost!"
Out of her bewitchment, whatever it was, the wood nymph flared suddenly,

and pointed a desperate finger at Delmars.
"It is you—you who have done this," she cried wildly. "You never sang that
song that way until lately. It is your doing."
"I give it up," said the sergeant.
And then the gray-haired matron of the police station came forward from
behind the sergeant's chair.
"Must an old woman teach you all?" she said. She went up to Miss Carroll and
took her hand.
"The man's wearing his heart out for you, my dear. Couldn't you tell it the first
note you heard him sing? All of his monkey flip-flops wouldn't have kept it
from me. Must you be deaf as well as blind? That's why you couldn't act your
part, child. Do you love him or must he be a gorilla for the rest of his days?"
Miss Carroll whirled around and caught Delmars with a lightning glance of
her eye. He came toward her, melancholy.
"Did you hear, Mr. Delmars?" she asked, with a catching breath.
"I did," said the comedian. "It is true. I didn't think there was any use. I tried to
let you know with the song."
"Silly!" said the matron; "why didn't you speak?"
"No, no," cried the wood nymph, "his way was the best. I didn't know, but—it
was just what I wanted, Bobby."
She sprang like a green grasshopper; and the comedian opened his arms, and
—smiled.
"Get out of this," roared the desk sergeant to the waiting waiter from the
restaurant. "There's nothing doing here for you."

XVII
ONE DOLLAR'S WORTH
The judge of the United States court of the district lying along the Rio Grande
border found the following letter one morning in his mail:
JUDGE:
When you sent me up for four years you made a talk. Among other hard
things, you called me a rattlesnake. Maybe I am one—anyhow, you hear me
rattling now. One year after I got to the pen, my daughter died of—well, they
said it was poverty and the disgrace together. You've got a daughter, Judge,
and I'm going to make you know how it feels to lose one. And I'm going to

bite that district attorney that spoke against me. I'm free now, and I guess I've
turned to rattlesnake all right. I feel like one. I don't say much, but this is my
rattle. Look out when I strike.
Yours respectfully,
RATTLESNAKE.
Judge Derwent threw the letter carelessly aside. It was nothing new to receive
such epistles from desperate men whom he had been called upon to judge. He
felt no alarm. Later on he showed the letter to Littlefield, the young district
attorney, for Littlefield's name was included in the threat, and the judge was
punctilious in matters between himself and his fellow men.
Littlefield honoured the rattle of the writer, as far as it concerned himself, with
a smile of contempt; but he frowned a little over the reference to the Judge's
daughter, for he and Nancy Derwent were to be married in the fall.
Littlefield went to the clerk of the court and looked over the records with him.
They decided that the letter might have been sent by Mexico Sam, a half-breed
border desperado who had been imprisoned for manslaughter four years
before. Then official duties crowded the matter from his mind, and the rattle of
the revengeful serpent was forgotten.
Court was in session at Brownsville. Most of the cases to be tried were
charges of smuggling, counterfeiting, post-office robberies, and violations of
Federal laws along the border. One case was that of a young Mexican, Rafael
Ortiz, who had been rounded up by a clever deputy marshal in the act of
passing a counterfeit silver dollar. He had been suspected of many such
deviations from rectitude, but this was the first time that anything provable
had been fixed upon him. Ortiz languished cozily in jail, smoking brown
cigarettes and waiting for trial. Kilpatrick, the deputy, brought the counterfeit
dollar and handed it to the district attorney in his office in the court-house. The
deputy and a reputable druggist were prepared to swear that Ortiz paid for a
bottle of medicine with it. The coin was a poor counterfeit, soft, dull-looking,
and made principally of lead. It was the day before the morning on which the
docket would reach the case of Ortiz, and the district attorney was preparing
himself for trial.
"Not much need of having in high-priced experts to prove the coin's queer, is
there, Kil?" smiled Littlefield, as he thumped the dollar down upon the table,
where it fell with no more ring than would have come from a lump of putty.
"I guess the Greaser's as good as behind the bars," said the deputy, easing up
his holsters. "You've got him dead. If it had been just one time, these Mexicans
can't tell good money from bad; but this little yaller rascal belongs to a gang of
counterfeiters, I know. This is the first time I've been able to catch him doing
the trick. He's got a girl down there in them Mexican jacals on the river bank. I

seen her one day when I was watching him. She's as pretty as a red heifer in a
flower bed."
Littlefield shoved the counterfeit dollar into his pocket, and slipped his
memoranda of the case into an envelope. Just then a bright, winsome face, as
frank and jolly as a boy's, appeared in the doorway, and in walked Nancy
Derwent.
"Oh, Bob, didn't court adjourn at twelve to-day until to-morrow?" she asked of
Littlefield.
"It did," said the district attorney, "and I'm very glad of it. I've got a lot of
rulings to look up, and—"
"Now, that's just like you. I wonder you and father don't turn to law books or
rulings or something! I want you to take me out plover-shooting this
afternoon. Long Prairie is just alive with them. Don't say no, please! I want to
try my new twelve-bore hammerless. I've sent to the livery stable to engage
Fly and Bess for the buckboard; they stand fire so nicely. I was sure you would
go."
They were to be married in the fall. The glamour was at its height. The plovers
won the day—or, rather, the afternoon—over the calf-bound authorities.
Littlefield began to put his papers away.
There was a knock at the door. Kilpatrick answered it. A beautiful, dark-eyed
girl with a skin tinged with the faintest lemon colour walked into the room. A
black shawl was thrown over her head and wound once around her neck.
She began to talk in Spanish, a voluble, mournful stream of melancholy music.
Littlefield did not understand Spanish. The deputy did, and he translated her
talk by portions, at intervals holding up his hand to check the flow of her
words.
"She came to see you, Mr. Littlefield. Her name's Joya Treviñas. She wants to
see you about—well, she's mixed up with that Rafael Ortiz. She's his—she's
his girl. She says he's innocent. She says she made the money and got him to
pass it. Don't you believe her, Mr. Littlefield. That's the way with these
Mexican girls; they'll lie, steal, or kill for a fellow when they get stuck on him.
Never trust a woman that's in love!"
"Mr. Kilpatrick!"
Nancy Derwent's indignant exclamation caused the deputy to flounder for a
moment in attempting to explain that he had misquoted his own sentiments,
and then he went on with the translation:
"She says she's willing to take his place in the jail if you'll let him out. She
says she was down sick with the fever, and the doctor said she'd die if she
didn't have medicine. That's why he passed the lead dollar on the drug store.

She says it saved her life. This Rafael seems to be her honey, all right; there's a
lot of stuff in her talk about love and such things that you don't want to hear."
It was an old story to the district attorney.
"Tell her," said he, "that I can do nothing. The case comes up in the morning,
and he will have to make his fight before the court."
Nancy Derwent was not so hardened. She was looking with sympathetic
interest at Joya Treviñas and at Littlefield alternately. The deputy repeated the
district attorney's words to the girl. She spoke a sentence or two in a low
voice, pulled her shawl closely about her face, and left the room.
"What did she say then?" asked the district attorney.
"Nothing special," said the deputy. "She said: 'If the life of the one'—let's see
how it went—'Si la vida de ella a quien tu amas—if the life of the girl you
love is ever in danger, remember Rafael Ortiz.'"
Kilpatrick strolled out through the corridor in the direction of the marshal's
office.
"Can't you do anything for them, Bob?" asked Nancy. "It's such a little thing—
just one counterfeit dollar—to ruin the happiness of two lives! She was in
danger of death, and he did it to save her. Doesn't the law know the feeling of
pity?"
"It hasn't a place in jurisprudence, Nan," said Littlefield, "especially in re the
district attorney's duty. I'll promise you that the prosecution will not be
vindictive; but the man is as good as convicted when the case is called.
Witnesses will swear to his passing the bad dollar which I have in my pocket
at this moment as 'Exhibit A.' There are no Mexicans on the jury, and it will
vote Mr. Greaser guilty without leaving the box."
The plover-shooting was fine that afternoon, and in the excitement of the sport
the case of Rafael and the grief of Joya Treviñas was forgotten. The district
attorney and Nancy Derwent drove out from the town three miles along a
smooth, grassy road, and then struck across a rolling prairie toward a heavy
line of timber on Piedra Creek. Beyond this creek lay Long Prairie, the
favourite haunt of the plover. As they were nearing the creek they heard the
galloping of a horse to their right, and saw a man with black hair and a
swarthy face riding toward the woods at a tangent, as if he had come up
behind them.
"I've seen that fellow somewhere," said Littlefield, who had a memory for
faces, "but I can't exactly place him. Some ranchman, I suppose, taking a short
cut home."
They spent an hour on Long Prairie, shooting from the buckboard. Nancy

Derwent, an active, outdoor Western girl, was pleased with her twelve-bore.
She had bagged within two brace of her companion's score.
They started homeward at a gentle trot. When within a hundred yards of
Piedra Creek a man rode out of the timber directly toward them.
"It looks like the man we saw coming over," remarked Miss Derwent.
As the distance between them lessened, the district attorney suddenly pulled
up his team sharply, with his eyes fixed upon the advancing horseman. That
individual had drawn a Winchester from its scabbard on his saddle and thrown
it over his arm.
"Now I know you, Mexico Sam!" muttered Littlefield to himself. "It was you
who shook your rattles in that gentle epistle."
Mexico Sam did not leave things long in doubt. He had a nice eye in all
matters relating to firearms, so when he was within good rifle range, but
outside of danger from No. 8 shot, he threw up his Winchester and opened fire
upon the occupants of the buckboard.
The first shot cracked the back of the seat within the two-inch space between
the shoulders of Littlefield and Miss Derwent. The next went through the
dashboard and Littlefield's trouser leg.
The district attorney hustled Nancy out of the buck-board to the ground. She
was a little pale, but asked no questions. She had the frontier instinct that
accepts conditions in an emergency without superfluous argument. They kept
their guns in hand, and Littlefield hastily gathered some handfuls of cartridges
from the pasteboard box on the seat and crowded them into his pockets.
"Keep behind the horses, Nan," he commanded. "That fellow is a ruffian I sent
to prison once. He's trying to get even. He knows our shot won't hurt him at
that distance."
"All right, Bob," said Nancy steadily. "I'm not afraid. But you come close, too.
Whoa, Bess; stand still, now!"
She stroked Bess's mane. Littlefield stood with his gun ready, praying that the
desperado would come within range.
But Mexico Sam was playing his vendetta along safe lines. He was a bird of
different feather from the plover. His accurate eye drew an imaginary line of
circumference around the area of danger from bird-shot, and upon this line lie
rode. His horse wheeled to the right, and as his victims rounded to the safe
side of their equine breast-work he sent a ball through the district attorney's
hat. Once he miscalculated in making a détour, and over-stepped his margin.
Littlefield's gun flashed, and Mexico Sam ducked his head to the harmless
patter of the shot. A few of them stung his horse, which pranced promptly
back to the safety line.

The desperado fired again. A little cry came from Nancy Derwent. Littlefield
whirled, with blazing eyes, and saw the blood trickling down her cheek.
"I'm not hurt, Bob—only a splinter struck me. I think he hit one of the wheelspokes."
"Lord!" groaned Littlefield. "If I only had a charge of buckshot!"
The ruffian got his horse still, and took careful aim. Fly gave a snort and fell in
the harness, struck in the neck. Bess, now disabused of the idea that plover
were being fired at, broke her traces and galloped wildly away. Mexican Sam
sent a ball neatly through the fulness of Nancy Derwent's shooting jacket.
"Lie down—lie down!" snapped Littlefield. "Close to the horse—flat on the
ground—so." He almost threw her upon the grass against the back of the
recumbent Fly. Oddly enough, at that moment the words of the Mexican girl
returned to his mind:
"If the life of the girl you love is ever in danger, remember Rafael Ortiz."
Littlefield uttered an exclamation.
"Open fire on him, Nan, across the horse's back. Fire as fast as you can! You
can't hurt him, but keep him dodging shot for one minute while I try to work a
little scheme."
Nancy gave a quick glance at Littlefield, and saw him take out his pocketknife and open it. Then she turned her face to obey orders, keeping up a rapid
fire at the enemy.
Mexico Sam waited patiently until this innocuous fusillade ceased. He had
plenty of time, and he did not care to risk the chance of a bird-shot in his eye
when it could be avoided by a little caution. He pulled his heavy Stetson low
down over his face until the shots ceased. Then he drew a little nearer, and
fired with careful aim at what he could see of his victims above the fallen
horse.
Neither of them moved. He urged his horse a few steps nearer. He saw the
district attorney rise to one knee and deliberately level his shotgun. He pulled
his hat down and awaited the harmless rattle of the tiny pellets.
The shotgun blazed with a heavy report. Mexico Sam sighed, turned limp all
over, and slowly fell from his horse—a dead rattlesnake.
At ten o'clock the next morning court opened, and the case of the United
States versus Rafael Ortiz was called. The district attorney, with his arm in a
sling, rose and addressed the court.
"May it please your honour," he said, "I desire to enter a nolle pros. in this
case. Even though the defendant should be guilty, there is not sufficient
evidence in the hands of the government to secure a conviction. The piece of

counterfeit coin upon the identity of which the case was built is not now
available as evidence. I ask, therefore, that the case be stricken off."
At the noon recess Kilpatrick strolled into the district attorney's office.
"I've just been down to take a squint at old Mexico Sam," said the deputy.
"They've got him laid out. Old Mexico was a tough outfit, I reckon. The boys
was wonderin' down there what you shot him with. Some said it must have
been nails. I never see a gun carry anything to make holes like he had."
"I shot him," said the district attorney, "with Exhibit A of your counterfeiting
case. Lucky thing for me—and somebody else—that it was as bad money as it
was! It sliced up into slugs very nicely. Say, Kil, can't you go down to the
jacals and find where that Mexican girl lives? Miss Derwent wants to know."

XVIII
A NEWSPAPER STORY
At 8 A. M. it lay on Giuseppi's news-stand, still damp from the presses.
Giuseppi, with the cunning of his ilk, philandered on the opposite corner,
leaving his patrons to help themselves, no doubt on a theory related to the
hypothesis of the watched pot.
This particular newspaper was, according to its custom and design, an
educator, a guide, a monitor, a champion and a household counsellor and vade
mecum.
From its many excellencies might be selected three editorials. One was in
simple and chaste but illuminating language directed to parents and teachers,
deprecating corporal punishment for children.
Another was an accusive and significant warning addressed to a notorious
labour leader who was on the point of instigating his clients to a troublesome
strike.
The third was an eloquent demand that the police force be sustained and aided
in everything that tended to increase its efficiency as public guardians and
servants.
Besides these more important chidings and requisitions upon the store of good
citizenship was a wise prescription or form of procedure laid out by the editor
of the heart-to-heart column in the specific case of a young man who had
complained of the obduracy of his lady love, teaching him how he might win
her.
Again, there was, on the beauty page, a complete answer to a young lady

inquirer who desired admonition toward the securing of bright eyes, rosy
cheeks and a beautiful countenance.
One other item requiring special cognizance was a brief "personal," running
thus:
DEAR JACK:—Forgive me. You were right. Meet me corner Madison and
––––th at 8.30 this morning. We leave at noon. PENITENT.
At 8 o'clock a young man with a haggard look and the feverish gleam of unrest
in his eye dropped a penny and picked up the top paper as he passed
Giuseppi's stand. A sleepless night had left him a late riser. There was an
office to be reached by nine, and a shave and a hasty cup of coffee to be
crowded into the interval.
He visited his barber shop and then hurried on his way. He pocketed his paper,
meditating a belated perusal of it at the luncheon hour. At the next corner it
fell from his pocket, carrying with it his pair of new gloves. Three blocks he
walked, missed the gloves and turned back fuming.
Just on the half-hour he reached the corner where lay the gloves and the paper.
But he strangely ignored that which he had come to seek. He was holding two
little hands as tightly as ever he could and looking into two penitent brown
eyes, while joy rioted in his heart.
"Dear Jack," she said, "I knew you would be here on time."
"I wonder what she means by that," he was saying to himself; "but it's all right,
it's all right."
A big wind puffed out of the west, picked up the paper from the sidewalk,
opened it out and sent it flying and whirling down a side street. Up that street
was driving a skittish bay to a spider-wheel buggy, the young man who had
written to the heart-to-heart editor for a recipe that he might win her for whom
he sighed.
The wind, with a prankish flurry, flapped the flying newspaper against the face
of the skittish bay. There was a lengthened streak of bay mingled with the red
of running gear that stretched itself out for four blocks. Then a water-hydrant
played its part in the cosmogony, the buggy became matchwood as
foreordained, and the driver rested very quietly where he had been flung on
the asphalt in front of a certain brownstone mansion.
They came out and had him inside very promptly. And there was one who
made herself a pillow for his head, and cared for no curious eyes, bending over
and saying, "Oh, it was you; it was you all the time, Bobby! Couldn't you see
it? And if you die, why, so must I, and—"
But in all this wind we must hurry to keep in touch with our paper.

Policeman O'Brine arrested it as a character dangerous to traffic. Straightening
its dishevelled leaves with his big, slow fingers, he stood a few feet from the
family entrance of the Shandon Bells Café. One headline he spelled out
ponderously: "The Papers to the Front in a Move to Help the Police."
But, whisht! The voice of Danny, the head bartender, through the crack of the
door: "Here's a nip for ye, Mike, ould man."
Behind the widespread, amicable columns of the press Policeman O'Brine
receives swiftly his nip of the real stuff. He moves away, stalwart, refreshed,
fortified, to his duties. Might not the editor man view with pride the early, the
spiritual, the literal fruit that had blessed his labours.
Policeman O'Brine folded the paper and poked it playfully under the arm of a
small boy that was passing. That boy was named Johnny, and he took the
paper home with him. His sister was named Gladys, and she had written to the
beauty editor of the paper asking for the practicable touchstone of beauty. That
was weeks ago, and she had ceased to look for an answer. Gladys was a pale
girl, with dull eyes and a discontented expression. She was dressing to go up
to the avenue to get some braid. Beneath her skirt she pinned two leaves of the
paper Johnny had brought. When she walked the rustling sound was an exact
imitation of the real thing.
On the street she met the Brown girl from the flat below and stopped to talk.
The Brown girl turned green. Only silk at $5 a yard could make the sound that
she heard when Gladys moved. The Brown girl, consumed by jealousy, said
something spiteful and went her way, with pinched lips.
Gladys proceeded toward the avenue. Her eyes now sparkled like
jagerfonteins. A rosy bloom visited her cheeks; a triumphant, subtle, vivifying,
smile transfigured her face. She was beautiful. Could the beauty editor have
seen her then! There was something in her answer in the paper, I believe,
about cultivating kind feelings toward others in order to make plain features
attractive.
The labour leader against whom the paper's solemn and weighty editorial
injunction was laid was the father of Gladys and Johnny. He picked up the
remains of the journal from which Gladys had ravished a cosmetic of silken
sounds. The editorial did not come under his eye, but instead it was greeted by
one of those ingenious and specious puzzle problems that enthrall alike the
simpleton and the sage.
The labour leader tore off half of the page, provided himself with table, pencil
and paper and glued himself to his puzzle.
Three hours later, after waiting vainly for him at the appointed place, other
more conservative leaders declared and ruled in favour of arbitration, and the
strike with its attendant dangers was averted. Subsequent editions of the paper

referred, in coloured inks, to the clarion tone of its successful denunciation of
the labour leader's intended designs.
The remaining leaves of the active journal also went loyally to the proving of
its potency.
When Johnny returned from school he sought a secluded spot and removed the
missing columns from the inside of his clothing, where they had been artfully
distributed so as to successfully defend such areas as are generally attacked
during scholastic castigations. Johnny attended a private school and had had
trouble with his teacher. As has been said, there was an excellent editorial
against corporal punishment in that morning's issue, and no doubt it had its
effect.
After this can any one doubt the power of the press?

XIX
TOMMY'S BURGLAR
At ten o'clock P. M. Felicia, the maid, left by the basement door with the
policeman to get a raspberry phosphate around the corner. She detested the
policeman and objected earnestly to the arrangement. She pointed out, not
unreasonably, that she might have been allowed to fall asleep over one of St.
George Rathbone's novels on the third floor, but she was overruled.
Raspberries and cops were not created for nothing.
The burglar got into the house without much difficulty; because we must have
action and not too much description in a 2,000-word story.
In the dining room he opened the slide of his dark lantern. With a brace and
centrebit he began to bore into the lock of the silver-closet.
Suddenly a click was heard. The room was flooded with electric light. The
dark velvet portières parted to admit a fair-haired boy of eight in pink pajamas,
bearing a bottle of olive oil in his hand.
"Are you a burglar?" he asked, in a sweet, childish voice.
"Listen to that," exclaimed the man, in a hoarse voice. "Am I a burglar? Wot
do you suppose I have a three-days' growth of bristly beard on my face for,
and a cap with flaps? Give me the oil, quick, and let me grease the bit, so I
won't wake up your mamma, who is lying down with a headache, and left you
in charge of Felicia who has been faithless to her trust."
"Oh, dear," said Tommy, with a sigh. "I thought you would be more up-todate. This oil is for the salad when I bring lunch from the pantry for you. And

mamma and papa have gone to the Metropolitan to hear De Reszke. But that
isn't my fault. It only shows how long the story has been knocking around
among the editors. If the author had been wise he'd have changed it to Caruso
in the proofs."
"Be quiet," hissed the burglar, under his breath. "If you raise an alarm I'll
wring your neck like a rabbit's."
"Like a chicken's," corrected Tommy. "You had that wrong. You don't wring
rabbits' necks."
"Aren't you afraid of me?" asked the burglar.
"You know I'm not," answered Tommy. "Don't you suppose I know fact from
fiction. If this wasn't a story I'd yell like an Indian when I saw you; and you'd
probably tumble downstairs and get pinched on the sidewalk."
"I see," said the burglar, "that you're on to your job. Go on with the
performance."
Tommy seated himself in an armchair and drew his toes up under him.
"Why do you go around robbing strangers, Mr. Burglar? Have you no
friends?"
"I see what you're driving at," said the burglar, with a dark frown. "It's the
same old story. Your innocence and childish insouciance is going to lead me
back into an honest life. Every time I crack a crib where there's a kid around, it
happens."
"Would you mind gazing with wolfish eyes at the plate of cold beef that the
butler has left on the dining table?" said Tommy. "I'm afraid it's growing late."
The burglar accommodated.
"Poor man," said Tommy. "You must be hungry. If you will please stand in a
listless attitude I will get you something to eat."
The boy brought a roast chicken, a jar of marmalade and a bottle of wine from
the pantry. The burglar seized a knife and fork sullenly.
"It's only been an hour," he grumbled, "since I had a lobster and a pint of
musty ale up on Broadway. I wish these story writers would let a fellow have a
pepsin tablet, anyhow, between feeds."
"My papa writes books," remarked Tommy.
The burglar jumped to his feet quickly.
"You said he had gone to the opera," he hissed, hoarsely and with immediate
suspicion.
"I ought to have explained," said Tommy. "He didn't buy the tickets." The
burglar sat again and toyed with the wishbone.

"Why do you burgle houses?" asked the boy, wonderingly.
"Because," replied the burglar, with a sudden flow of tears. "God bless my
little brown-haired boy Bessie at home."
"Ah," said Tommy, wrinkling his nose, "you got that answer in the wrong
place. You want to tell your hard-luck story before you pull out the child stop."
"Oh, yes," said the burglar, "I forgot. Well, once I lived in Milwaukee, and—"
"Take the silver," said Tommy, rising from his chair.
"Hold on," said the burglar. "But I moved away." I could find no other
employment. For a while I managed to support my wife and child by passing
confederate money; but, alas! I was forced to give that up because it did not
belong to the union. I became desperate and a burglar."
"Have you ever fallen into the hands of the police?" asked Tommy.
"I said 'burglar,' not 'beggar,'" answered the cracksman.
"After you finish your lunch," said Tommy, "and experience the usual change
of heart, how shall we wind up the story?"
"Suppose," said the burglar, thoughtfully, "that Tony Pastor turns out earlier
than usual to-night, and your father gets in from 'Parsifal' at 10.30. I am
thoroughly repentant because you have made me think of my own little boy
Bessie, and—"
"Say," said Tommy, "haven't you got that wrong?"
"Not on your coloured crayon drawings by B. Cory Kilvert," said the burglar.
"It's always a Bessie that I have at home, artlessly prattling to the pale-cheeked
burglar's bride. As I was saying, your father opens the front door just as I am
departing with admonitions and sandwiches that you have wrapped up for me.
Upon recognizing me as an old Harvard classmate he starts back in—"
"Not in surprise?" interrupted Tommy, with wide, open eyes.
"He starts back in the doorway," continued the burglar. And then he rose to his
feet and began to shout "Rah, rah, rah! rah, rah, rah! rah, rah, rah!"
"Well," said Tommy, wonderingly, "that's, the first time I ever knew a burglar
to give a college yell when he was burglarizing a house, even in a story."
"That's one on you," said the burglar, with a laugh. "I was practising the
dramatization. If this is put on the stage that college touch is about the only
thing that will make it go."
Tommy looked his admiration.
"You're on, all right," he said.
"And there's another mistake you've made," said the burglar. "You should have

gone some time ago and brought me the $9 gold piece your mother gave you
on your birthday to take to Bessie."
"But she didn't give it to me to take to Bessie," said Tommy, pouting.
"Come, come!" said the burglar, sternly. "It's not nice of you to take advantage
because the story contains an ambiguous sentence. You know what I mean. It's
mighty little I get out of these fictional jobs, anyhow. I lose all the loot, and I
have to reform every time; and all the swag I'm allowed is the blamed little
fol-de-rols and luck-pieces that you kids hand over. Why, in one story, all I got
was a kiss from a little girl who came in on me when I was opening a safe.
And it tasted of molasses candy, too. I've a good notion to tie this table cover
over your head and keep on into the silver-closet."
"Oh, no, you haven't," said Tommy, wrapping his arms around his knees.
"Because if you did no editor would buy the story. You know you've got to
preserve the unities."
"So've you," said the burglar, rather glumly. "Instead of sitting here talking
impudence and taking the bread out of a poor man's mouth, what you'd like to
be doing is hiding under the bed and screeching at the top of your voice."
"You're right, old man," said Tommy, heartily. "I wonder what they make us
do it for? I think the S. P. C. C. ought to interfere. I'm sure it's neither
agreeable nor usual for a kid of my age to butt in when a full-grown burglar is
at work and offer him a red sled and a pair of skates not to awaken his sick
mother. And look how they make the burglars act! You'd think editors would
know—but what's the use?"
The burglar wiped his hands on the tablecloth and arose with a yawn.
"Well, let's get through with it," he said. "God bless you, my little boy! you
have saved a man from committing a crime this night. Bessie shall pray for
you as soon as I get home and give her her orders. I shall never burglarize
another house—at least not until the June magazines are out. It'll be your little
sister's turn then to run in on me while I am abstracting the U. S. 4 per cent.
from the tea urn and buy me off with her coral necklace and a falsetto kiss."
"You haven't got all the kicks coming to you," sighed Tommy, crawling out of
his chair. "Think of the sleep I'm losing. But it's tough on both of us, old man.
I wish you could get out of the story and really rob somebody. Maybe you'll
have the chance if they dramatize us."
"Never!" said the burglar, gloomily. "Between the box office and my better
impulses that your leading juveniles are supposed to awaken and the
magazines that pay on publication, I guess I'll always be broke."
"I'm sorry," said Tommy, sympathetically. "But I can't help myself any more
than you can. It's one of the canons of household fiction that no burglar shall

be successful. The burglar must be foiled by a kid like me, or by a young lady
heroine, or at the last moment by his old pal, Red Mike, who recognizes the
house as one in which he used to be the coachman. You have got the worst end
of it in any kind of a story."
"Well, I suppose I must be clearing out now," said the burglar, taking up his
lantern and bracebit.
"You have to take the rest of this chicken and the bottle of wine with you for
Bessie and her mother," said Tommy, calmly.
"But confound it," exclaimed the burglar, in an annoyed tone, "they don't want
it. I've got five cases of Château de Beychsvelle at home that was bottled in
1853. That claret of yours is corked. And you couldn't get either of them to
look at a chicken unless it was stewed in champagne. You know, after I get out
of the story I don't have so many limitations. I make a turn now and then."
"Yes, but you must take them," said Tommy, loading his arms with the
bundles.
"Bless you, young master!" recited the burglar, obedient. "Second-Story Saul
will never forget you. And now hurry and let me out, kid. Our 2,000 words
must be nearly up."
Tommy led the way through the hall toward the front door. Suddenly the
burglar stopped and called to him softly: "Ain't there a cop out there in front
somewhere sparking the girl?"
"Yes," said Tommy, "but what—"
"I'm afraid he'll catch me," said the burglar. "You mustn't forget that this is
fiction."
"Great head!" said Tommy, turning. "Come out by the back door."

XX
A CHAPARRAL CHRISTMAS GIFT
The original cause of the trouble was about twenty years in growing.
At the end of that time it was worth it.
Had you lived anywhere within fifty miles of Sundown Ranch you would have
heard of it. It possessed a quantity of jet-black hair, a pair of extremely frank,
deep-brown eyes and a laugh that rippled across the prairie like the sound of a
hidden brook. The name of it was Rosita McMullen; and she was the daughter
of old man McMullen of the Sundown Sheep Ranch.

There came riding on red roan steeds—or, to be more explicit, on a paint and a
flea-bitten sorrel—two wooers. One was Madison Lane, and the other was the
Frio Kid. But at that time they did not call him the Frio Kid, for he had not
earned the honours of special nomenclature. His name was simply Johnny
McRoy.
It must not be supposed that these two were the sum of the agreeable Rosita's
admirers. The bronchos of a dozen others champed their bits at the long
hitching rack of the Sundown Ranch. Many were the sheeps'-eyes that were
cast in those savannas that did not belong to the flocks of Dan McMullen. But
of all the cavaliers, Madison Lane and Johnny McRoy galloped far ahead,
wherefore they are to be chronicled.
Madison Lane, a young cattleman from the Nueces country, won the race. He
and Rosita were married one Christmas day. Armed, hilarious, vociferous,
magnanimous, the cowmen and the sheepmen, laying aside their hereditary
hatred, joined forces to celebrate the occasion.
Sundown Ranch was sonorous with the cracking of jokes and sixshooters, the
shine of buckles and bright eyes, the outspoken congratulations of the herders
of kine.
But while the wedding feast was at its liveliest there descended upon it Johnny
McRoy, bitten by jealousy, like one possessed.
"I'll give you a Christmas present," he yelled, shrilly, at the door, with his .45
in his hand. Even then he had some reputation as an offhand shot.
His first bullet cut a neat underbit in Madison Lane's right ear. The barrel of
his gun moved an inch. The next shot would have been the bride's had not
Carson, a sheepman, possessed a mind with triggers somewhat well oiled and
in repair. The guns of the wedding party had been hung, in their belts, upon
nails in the wall when they sat at table, as a concession to good taste. But
Carson, with great promptness, hurled his plate of roast venison and frijoles at
McRoy, spoiling his aim. The second bullet, then, only shattered the white
petals of a Spanish dagger flower suspended two feet above Rosita's head.
The guests spurned their chairs and jumped for their weapons. It was
considered an improper act to shoot the bride and groom at a wedding. In
about six seconds there were twenty or so bullets due to be whizzing in the
direction of Mr. McRoy.
"I'll shoot better next time," yelled Johnny; "and there'll be a next time." He
backed rapidly out the door.
Carson, the sheepman, spurred on to attempt further exploits by the success of
his plate-throwing, was first to reach the door. McRoy's bullet from the
darkness laid him low.

The cattlemen then swept out upon him, calling for vengeance, for, while the
slaughter of a sheepman has not always lacked condonement, it was a decided
misdemeanour in this instance. Carson was innocent; he was no accomplice at
the matrimonial proceedings; nor had any one heard him quote the line
"Christmas comes but once a year" to the guests.
But the sortie failed in its vengeance. McRoy was on his horse and away,
shouting back curses and threats as he galloped into the concealing chaparral.
That night was the birthnight of the Frio Kid. He became the "bad man" of that
portion of the State. The rejection of his suit by Miss McMullen turned him to
a dangerous man. When officers went after him for the shooting of Carson, he
killed two of them, and entered upon the life of an outlaw. He became a
marvellous shot with either hand. He would turn up in towns and settlements,
raise a quarrel at the slightest opportunity, pick off his man and laugh at the
officers of the law. He was so cool, so deadly, so rapid, so inhumanly bloodthirsty that none but faint attempts were ever made to capture him. When he
was at last shot and killed by a little one-armed Mexican who was nearly dead
himself from fright, the Frio Kid had the deaths of eighteen men on his head.
About half of these were killed in fair duels depending upon the quickness of
the draw. The other half were men whom he assassinated from absolute
wantonness and cruelty.
Many tales are told along the border of his impudent courage and daring. But
he was not one of the breed of desperadoes who have seasons of generosity
and even of softness. They say he never had mercy on the object of his anger.
Yet at this and every Christmastide it is well to give each one credit, if it can
be done, for whatever speck of good he may have possessed. If the Frio Kid
ever did a kindly act or felt a throb of generosity in his heart it was once at
such a time and season, and this is the way it happened.
One who has been crossed in love should never breathe the odour from the
blossoms of the ratama tree. It stirs the memory to a dangerous degree.
One December in the Frio country there was a ratama tree in full bloom, for
the winter had been as warm as springtime. That way rode the Frio Kid and his
satellite and co-murderer, Mexican Frank. The kid reined in his mustang, and
sat in his saddle, thoughtful and grim, with dangerously narrowing eyes. The
rich, sweet scent touched him somewhere beneath his ice and iron.
"I don't know what I've been thinking about, Mex," he remarked in his usual
mild drawl, "to have forgot all about a Christmas present I got to give. I'm
going to ride over to-morrow night and shoot Madison Lane in his own house.
He got my girl—Rosita would have had me if he hadn't cut into the game. I
wonder why I happened to overlook it up to now?"

"Ah, shucks, Kid," said Mexican, "don't talk foolishness. You know you can't
get within a mile of Mad Lane's house to-morrow night. I see old man Allen
day before yesterday, and he says Mad is going to have Christmas doings at
his house. You remember how you shot up the festivities when Mad was
married, and about the threats you made? Don't you suppose Mad Lane'll kind
of keep his eye open for a certain Mr. Kid? You plumb make me tired, Kid,
with such remarks."
"I'm going," repeated the Frio Kid, without heat, "to go to Madison Lane's
Christmas doings, and kill him. I ought to have done it a long time ago. Why,
Mex, just two weeks ago I dreamed me and Rosita was married instead of her
and him; and we was living in a house, and I could see her smiling at me, and
—oh! h––––l, Mex, he got her; and I'll get him—yes, sir, on Christmas Eve he
got her, and then's when I'll get him."
"There's other ways of committing suicide," advised Mexican. "Why don't you
go and surrender to the sheriff?"
"I'll get him," said the Kid.
Christmas Eve fell as balmy as April. Perhaps there was a hint of far-away
frostiness in the air, but it tingles like seltzer, perfumed faintly with late prairie
blossoms and the mesquite grass.
When night came the five or six rooms of the ranch-house were brightly lit. In
one room was a Christmas tree, for the Lanes had a boy of three, and a dozen
or more guests were expected from the nearer ranches.
At nightfall Madison Lane called aside Jim Belcher and three other cowboys
employed on his ranch.
"Now, boys," said Lane, "keep your eyes open. Walk around the house and
watch the road well. All of you know the 'Frio Kid,' as they call him now, and
if you see him, open fire on him without asking any questions. I'm not afraid
of his coming around, but Rosita is. She's been afraid he'd come in on us every
Christmas since we were married."
The guests had arrived in buckboards and on horseback, and were making
themselves comfortable inside.
The evening went along pleasantly. The guests enjoyed and praised Rosita's
excellent supper, and afterward the men scattered in groups about the rooms or
on the broad "gallery," smoking and chatting.
The Christmas tree, of course, delighted the youngsters, and above all were
they pleased when Santa Claus himself in magnificent white beard and furs
appeared and began to distribute the toys.
"It's my papa," announced Billy Sampson, aged six. "I've seen him wear 'em
before."

Berkly, a sheepman, an old friend of Lane, stopped Rosita as she was passing
by him on the gallery, where he was sitting smoking.
"Well, Mrs. Lane," said he, "I suppose by this Christmas you've gotten over
being afraid of that fellow McRoy, haven't you? Madison and I have talked
about it, you know."
"Very nearly," said Rosita, smiling, "but I am still nervous sometimes. I shall
never forget that awful time when he came so near to killing us."
"He's the most cold-hearted villain in the world," said Berkly. "The citizens all
along the border ought to turn out and hunt him down like a wolf."
"He has committed awful crimes," said Rosita, "but—I—don't—know. I think
there is a spot of good somewhere in everybody. He was not always bad—that
I know."
Rosita turned into the hallway between the rooms. Santa Claus, in muffling
whiskers and furs, was just coming through.
"I heard what you said through the window, Mrs. Lane," he said. "I was just
going down in my pocket for a Christmas present for your husband. But I've
left one for you, instead. It's in the room to your right."
"Oh, thank you, kind Santa Claus," said Rosita, brightly.
Rosita went into the room, while Santa Claus stepped into the cooler air of the
yard.
She found no one in the room but Madison.
"Where is my present that Santa said he left for me in here?" she asked.
"Haven't seen anything in the way of a present," said her husband, laughing,
"unless he could have meant me."
The next day Gabriel Radd, the foreman of the X O Ranch, dropped into the
post-office at Loma Alta.
"Well, the Frio Kid's got his dose of lead at last," he remarked to the
postmaster.
"That so? How'd it happen?"
"One of old Sanchez's Mexican sheep herders did it!—think of it! the Frio Kid
killed by a sheep herder! The Greaser saw him riding along past his camp
about twelve o'clock last night, and was so skeered that he up with a
Winchester and let him have it. Funniest part of it was that the Kid was
dressed all up with white Angora-skin whiskers and a regular Santy Claus rigout from head to foot. Think of the Frio Kid playing Santy!"

XXI
A LITTLE LOCAL COLOUR
I mentioned to Rivington that I was in search of characteristic New York
scenes and incidents—something typical, I told him, without necessarily
having to spell the first syllable with an "i."
"Oh, for your writing business," said Rivington; "you couldn't have applied to
a better shop. What I don't know about little old New York wouldn't make a
sonnet to a sunbonnet. I'll put you right in the middle of so much local colour
that you won't know whether you are a magazine cover or in the erysipelas
ward. When do you want to begin?"
Rivington is a young-man-about-town and a New Yorker by birth, preference
and incommutability.
I told him that I would be glad to accept his escort and guardianship so that I
might take notes of Manhattan's grand, gloomy and peculiar idiosyncrasies,
and that the time of so doing would be at his own convenience.
"We'll begin this very evening," said Rivington, himself interested, like a good
fellow. "Dine with me at seven, and then I'll steer you up against metropolitan
phases so thick you'll have to have a kinetoscope to record 'em."
So I dined with Rivington pleasantly at his club, in Forty-eleventh street, and
then we set forth in pursuit of the elusive tincture of affairs.
As we came out of the club there stood two men on the sidewalk near the steps
in earnest conversation.
"And by what process of ratiocination," said one of them, "do you arrive at the
conclusion that the division of society into producing and non-possessing
classes predicates failure when compared with competitive systems that are
monopolizing in tendency and result inimically to industrial evolution?"
"Oh, come off your perch!" said the other man, who wore glasses. "Your
premises won't come out in the wash. You wind-jammers who apply bandylegged theories to concrete categorical syllogisms send logical conclusions
skallybootin' into the infinitesimal ragbag. You can't pull my leg with an old
sophism with whiskers on it. You quote Marx and Hyndman and Kautsky—
what are they?—shines! Tolstoi?—his garret is full of rats. I put it to you over
the home-plate that the idea of a cooperative commonwealth and an
abolishment of competitive systems simply takes the rag off the bush and
gives me hyperesthesia of the roopteetoop! The skookum house for yours!"
I stopped a few yards away and took out my little notebook.
"Oh, come ahead," said Rivington, somewhat nervously; "you don't want to

listen to that."
"Why, man," I whispered, "this is just what I do want to hear. These slang
types are among your city's most distinguishing features. Is this the Bowery
variety? I really must hear more of it."
"If I follow you," said the man who had spoken first, "you do not believe it
possible to reorganize society on the basis of common interest?"
"Shinny on your own side!" said the man with glasses. "You never heard any
such music from my foghorn. What I said was that I did not believe it
practicable just now. The guys with wads are not in the frame of mind to slack
up on the mazuma, and the man with the portable tin banqueting canister isn't
exactly ready to join the Bible class. You can bet your variegated socks that
the situation is all spifflicated up from the Battery to breakfast! What the
country needs is for some bully old bloke like Cobden or some wise guy like
old Ben Franklin to sashay up to the front and biff the nigger's head with the
baseball. Do you catch my smoke? What?"
Rivington pulled me by the arm impatiently.
"Please come on," he said. "Let's go see something. This isn't what you want."
"Indeed, it is," I said resisting. "This tough talk is the very stuff that counts.
There is a picturesqueness about the speech of the lower order of people that is
quite unique. Did you say that this is the Bowery variety of slang?"
"Oh, well," said Rivington, giving it up, "I'll tell you straight. That's one of our
college professors talking. He ran down for a day or two at the club. It's a sort
of fad with him lately to use slang in his conversation. He thinks it improves
language. The man he is talking to is one of New York's famous social
economists. Now will you come on. You can't use that, you know."
"No," I agreed; "I can't use that. Would you call that typical of New York?"
"Of course not," said Rivington, with a sigh of relief. "I'm glad you see the
difference. But if you want to hear the real old tough Bowery slang I'll take
you down where you'll get your fill of it."
"I would like it," I said; "that is, if it's the real thing. I've often read it in books,
but I never heard it. Do you think it will be dangerous to go unprotected
among those characters?"
"Oh, no," said Rivington; "not at this time of night. To tell the truth, I haven't
been along the Bowery in a long time, but I know it as well as I do Broadway.
We'll look up some of the typical Bowery boys and get them to talk. It'll be
worth your while. They talk a peculiar dialect that you won't hear anywhere
else on earth."
Rivington and I went east in a Forty-second street car and then south on the

Third avenue line.
At Houston street we got off and walked.
"We are now on the famous Bowery," said Rivington; "the Bowery celebrated
in song and story."
We passed block after block of "gents'" furnishing stores—the windows full of
shirts with prices attached and cuffs inside. In other windows were neckties
and no shirts. People walked up and down the sidewalks.
"In some ways," said I, "this reminds me of Kokomono, Ind., during the
peach-crating season."
Rivington was nettled.
"Step into one of these saloons or vaudeville shows," said he, "with a large roll
of money, and see how quickly the Bowery will sustain its reputation."
"You make impossible conditions," said I, coldly.
By and by Rivington stopped and said we were in the heart of the Bowery.
There was a policeman on the corner whom Rivington knew.
"Hallo, Donahue!" said my guide. "How goes it? My friend and I are down
this way looking up a bit of local colour. He's anxious to meet one of the
Bowery types. Can't you put us on to something genuine in that line—
something that's got the colour, you know?"
Policeman Donahue turned himself about ponderously, his florid face full of
good-nature. He pointed with his club down the street.
"Sure!" he said huskily. "Here comes a lad now that was born on the Bowery
and knows every inch of it. If he's ever been above Bleecker street he's kept it
to himself."
A man about twenty-eight or twenty-nine, with a smooth face, was sauntering
toward us with his hands in his coat pockets. Policeman Donahue stopped him
with a courteous wave of his club.
"Evening, Kerry," he said. "Here's a couple of gents, friends of mine, that want
to hear you spiel something about the Bowery. Can you reel 'em off a few
yards?"
"Certainly, Donahue," said the young man, pleasantly. "Good evening,
gentlemen," he said to us, with a pleasant smile. Donahue walked off on his
beat.
"This is the goods," whispered Rivington, nudging me with his elbow. "Look
at his jaw!"
"Say, cull," said Rivington, pushing back his hat, "wot's doin'? Me and my
friend's taking a look down de old line—see? De copper tipped us off dat you

was wise to de bowery. Is dat right?"
I could not help admiring Rivington's power of adapting himself to his
surroundings.
"Donahue was right," said the young man, frankly; "I was brought up on the
Bowery. I have been news-boy, teamster, pugilist, member of an organized
band of 'toughs,' bartender, and a 'sport' in various meanings of the word. The
experience certainly warrants the supposition that I have at least a passing
acquaintance with a few phases of Bowery life. I will be pleased to place
whatever knowledge and experience I have at the service of my friend
Donahue's friends."
Rivington seemed ill at ease.
"I say," he said—somewhat entreatingly, "I thought—you're not stringing us,
are you? It isn't just the kind of talk we expected. You haven't even said 'Hully
gee!' once. Do you really belong on the Bowery?"
"I am afraid," said the Bowery boy, smilingly, "that at some time you have
been enticed into one of the dives of literature and had the counterfeit coin of
the Bowery passed upon you. The 'argot' to which you doubtless refer was the
invention of certain of your literary 'discoverers' who invaded the unknown
wilds below Third avenue and put strange sounds into the mouths of the
inhabitants. Safe in their homes far to the north and west, the credulous
readers who were beguiled by this new 'dialect' perused and believed. Like
Marco Polo and Mungo Park—pioneers indeed, but ambitious souls who
could not draw the line of demarcation between discovery and invention—the
literary bones of these explorers are dotting the trackless wastes of the subway.
While it is true that after the publication of the mythical language attributed to
the dwellers along the Bowery certain of its pat phrases and apt metaphors
were adopted and, to a limited extent, used in this locality, it was because our
people are prompt in assimilating whatever is to their commercial advantage.
To the tourists who visited our newly discovered clime, and who expected a
realization of their literary guide books, they supplied the demands of the
market.
"But perhaps I am wandering from the question. In what way can I assist you,
gentlemen? I beg you will believe that the hospitality of the street is extended
to all. There are, I regret to say, many catchpenny places of entertainment, but
I cannot conceive that they would entice you."
I felt Rivington lean somewhat heavily against me.
"Say!" he remarked, with uncertain utterance; "come and have a drink with
us."
"Thank you, but I never drink. I find that alcohol, even in the smallest

quantities, alters the perspective. And I must preserve my perspective, for I am
studying the Bowery. I have lived in it nearly thirty years, and I am just
beginning to understand its heartbeats. It is like a great river fed by a hundred
alien streams. Each influx brings strange seeds on its flood, strange silt and
weeds, and now and then a flower of rare promise. To construe this river
requires a man who can build dykes against the overflow, who is a naturalist, a
geologist, a humanitarian, a diver and a strong swimmer. I love my Bowery. It
was my cradle and is my inspiration. I have published one book. The critics
have been kind. I put my heart in it. I am writing another, into which I hope to
put both heart and brain. Consider me your guide, gentlemen. Is there anything
I can take you to see, any place to which I can conduct you?"
I was afraid to look at Rivington except with one eye.
"Thanks," said Rivington. "We were looking up . . . that is . . . my friend . . .
confound it; it's against all precedent, you know . . . awfully obliged . . . just
the same."
"In case," said our friend, "you would like to meet some of our Bowery young
men I would be pleased to have you visit the quarters of our East Side Kappa
Delta Phi Society, only two blocks east of here."
"Awfully sorry," said Rivington, "but my friend's got me on the jump to-night.
He's a terror when he's out after local colour. Now, there's nothing I would like
better than to drop in at the Kappa Delta Phi, but—some other time!"
We said our farewells and boarded a home-bound car. We had a rabbit on
upper Broadway, and then I parted with Rivington on a street corner.
"Well, anyhow," said he, braced and recovered, "it couldn't have happened
anywhere but in little old New York."
Which to say the least, was typical of Rivington.

XXII
GEORGIA'S RULING
If you should chance to visit the General Land Office, step into the
draughtsmen's room and ask to be shown the map of Salado County. A
leisurely German—possibly old Kampfer himself—will bring it to you. It will
be four feet square, on heavy drawing-cloth. The lettering and the figures will
be beautifully clear and distinct. The title will be in splendid, undecipherable
German text, ornamented with classic Teutonic designs—very likely Ceres or
Pomona leaning against the initial letters with cornucopias venting grapes and
wieners. You must tell him that this is not the map you wish to see; that he will

kindly bring you its official predecessor. He will then say, "Ach, so!" and
bring out a map half the size of the first, dim, old, tattered, and faded.
By looking carefully near its northwest corner you will presently come upon
the worn contours of Chiquito River, and, maybe, if your eyes are good,
discern the silent witness to this story.
The Commissioner of the Land Office was of the old style; his antique
courtesy was too formal for his day. He dressed in fine black, and there was a
suggestion of Roman drapery in his long coat-skirts. His collars were
"undetached" (blame haberdashery for the word); his tie was a narrow,
funereal strip, tied in the same knot as were his shoe-strings. His gray hair was
a trifle too long behind, but he kept it smooth and orderly. His face was cleanshaven, like the old statesmen's. Most people thought it a stern face, but when
its official expression was off, a few had seen altogether a different
countenance. Especially tender and gentle it had appeared to those who were
about him during the last illness of his only child.
The Commissioner had been a widower for years, and his life, outside his
official duties, had been so devoted to little Georgia that people spoke of it as
a touching and admirable thing. He was a reserved man, and dignified almost
to austerity, but the child had come below it all and rested upon his very heart,
so that she scarcely missed the mother's love that had been taken away. There
was a wonderful companionship between them, for she had many of his own
ways, being thoughtful and serious beyond her years.
One day, while she was lying with the fever burning brightly in her checks,
she said suddenly:
"Papa, I wish I could do something good for a whole lot of children!"
"What would you like to do, dear?" asked the Commissioner. "Give them a
party?"
"Oh, I don't mean those kind. I mean poor children who haven't homes, and
aren't loved and cared for as I am. I tell you what, papa!"
"What, my own child?"
"If I shouldn't get well, I'll leave them you—not give you, but just lend you,
for you must come to mamma and me when you die too. If you can find time,
wouldn't you do something to help them, if I ask you, papa?"
"Hush, hush dear, dear child," said the Commissioner, holding her hot little
hand against his cheek; "you'll get well real soon, and you and I will see what
we can do for them together."
But in whatsoever paths of benevolence, thus vaguely premeditated, the
Commissioner might tread, he was not to have the company of his beloved.

That night the little frail body grew suddenly too tired to struggle further, and
Georgia's exit was made from the great stage when she had scarcely begun to
speak her little piece before the footlights. But there must be a stage manager
who understands. She had given the cue to the one who was to speak after her.
A week after she was laid away, the Commissioner reappeared at the office, a
little more courteous, a little paler and sterner, with the black frock-coat
hanging a little more loosely from his tall figure.
His desk was piled with work that had accumulated during the four
heartbreaking weeks of his absence. His chief clerk had done what he could,
but there were questions of law, of fine judicial decisions to be made
concerning the issue of patents, the marketing and leasing of school lands, the
classification into grazing, agricultural, watered, and timbered, of new tracts to
be opened to settlers.
The Commissioner went to work silently and obstinately, putting back his
grief as far as possible, forcing his mind to attack the complicated and
important business of his office. On the second day after his return he called
the porter, pointed to a leather-covered chair that stood near his own, and
ordered it removed to a lumber-room at the top of the building. In that chair
Georgia would always sit when she came to the office for him of afternoons.
As time passed, the Commissioner seemed to grow more silent, solitary, and
reserved. A new phase of mind developed in him. He could not endure the
presence of a child. Often when a clattering youngster belonging to one of the
clerks would come chattering into the big business-room adjoining his little
apartment, the Commissioner would steal softly and close the door. He would
always cross the street to avoid meeting the school-children when they came
dancing along in happy groups upon the sidewalk, and his firm mouth would
close into a mere line.
It was nearly three months after the rains had washed the last dead flowerpetals from the mound above little Georgia when the "land-shark" firm of
Hamlin and Avery filed papers upon what they considered the "fattest"
vacancy of the year.
It should not be supposed that all who were termed "land-sharks" deserved the
name. Many of them were reputable men of good business character. Some of
them could walk into the most august councils of the State and say:
"Gentlemen, we would like to have this, and that, and matters go thus." But,
next to a three years' drought and the boll-worm, the Actual Settler hated the
Land-shark. The land-shark haunted the Land Office, where all the land
records were kept, and hunted "vacancies"—that is, tracts of unappropriated
public domain, generally invisible upon the official maps, but actually existing
"upon the ground." The law entitled any one possessing certain State scrip to

file by virtue of same upon any land not previously legally appropriated. Most
of the scrip was now in the hands of the land-sharks. Thus, at the cost of a few
hundred dollars, they often secured lands worth as many thousands. Naturally,
the search for "vacancies" was lively.
But often—very often—the land they thus secured, though legally
"unappropriated," would be occupied by happy and contented settlers, who
had laboured for years to build up their homes, only to discover that their titles
were worthless, and to receive peremptory notice to quit. Thus came about the
bitter and not unjustifiable hatred felt by the toiling settlers toward the shrewd
and seldom merciful speculators who so often turned them forth destitute and
homeless from their fruitless labours. The history of the state teems with their
antagonism. Mr. Land-shark seldom showed his face on "locations" from
which he should have to eject the unfortunate victims of a monstrously tangled
land system, but let his emissaries do the work. There was lead in every cabin,
moulded into balls for him; many of his brothers had enriched the grass with
their blood. The fault of it all lay far back.
When the state was young, she felt the need of attracting newcomers, and of
rewarding those pioneers already within her borders. Year after year she issued
land scrip—Headrights, Bounties, Veteran Donations, Confederates; and to
railroads, irrigation companies, colonies, and tillers of the soil galore. All
required of the grantee was that he or it should have the scrip properly
surveyed upon the public domain by the county or district surveyor, and the
land thus appropriated became the property of him or it, or his or its heirs and
assigns, forever.
In those days—and here is where the trouble began—the state's domain was
practically inexhaustible, and the old surveyors, with princely—yea, even
Western American—liberality, gave good measure and over-flowing. Often the
jovial man of metes and bounds would dispense altogether with the tripod and
chain. Mounted on a pony that could cover something near a "vara" at a step,
with a pocket compass to direct his course, he would trot out a survey by
counting the beat of his pony's hoofs, mark his corners, and write out his field
notes with the complacency produced by an act of duty well performed.
Sometimes—and who could blame the surveyor?—when the pony was
"feeling his oats," he might step a little higher and farther, and in that case the
beneficiary of the scrip might get a thousand or two more acres in his survey
than the scrip called for. But look at the boundless leagues the state had to
spare! However, no one ever had to complain of the pony under-stepping.
Nearly every old survey in the state contained an excess of land.
In later years, when the state became more populous, and land values
increased, this careless work entailed incalculable trouble, endless litigation, a
period of riotous land-grabbing, and no little bloodshed. The land-sharks

voraciously attacked these excesses in the old surveys, and filed upon such
portions with new scrip as unappropriated public domain. Wherever the
identifications of the old tracts were vague, and the corners were not to be
clearly established, the Land Office would recognize the newer locations as
valid, and issue title to the locators. Here was the greatest hardship to be
found. These old surveys, taken from the pick of the land, were already nearly
all occupied by unsuspecting and peaceful settlers, and thus their titles were
demolished, and the choice was placed before them either to buy their land
over at a double price or to vacate it, with their families and personal
belongings, immediately. Land locators sprang up by hundreds. The country
was held up and searched for "vacancies" at the point of a compass. Hundreds
of thousands of dollars' worth of splendid acres were wrested from their
innocent purchasers and holders. There began a vast hegira of evicted settlers
in tattered wagons; going nowhere, cursing injustice, stunned, purposeless,
homeless, hopeless. Their children began to look up to them for bread, and
cry.
It was in consequence of these conditions that Hamilton and Avery had filed
upon a strip of land about a mile wide and three miles long, comprising about
two thousand acres, it being the excess over complement of the Elias Denny
three-league survey on Chiquito River, in one of the middle-western counties.
This two-thousand-acre body of land was asserted by them to be vacant land,
and improperly considered a part of the Denny survey. They based this
assertion and their claim upon the land upon the demonstrated facts that the
beginning corner of the Denny survey was plainly identified; that its field
notes called to run west 5,760 varas, and then called for Chiquito River;
thence it ran south, with the meanders—and so on—and that the Chiquito
River was, on the ground, fully a mile farther west from the point reached by
course and distance. To sum up: there were two thousand acres of vacant land
between the Denny survey proper and Chiquito River.
One sweltering day in July the Commissioner called for the papers in
connection with this new location. They were brought, and heaped, a foot
deep, upon his desk—field notes, statements, sketches, affidavits, connecting
lines—documents of every description that shrewdness and money could call
to the aid of Hamlin and Avery.
The firm was pressing the Commissioner to issue a patent upon their location.
They possesed inside information concerning a new railroad that would
probably pass somewhere near this land.
The General Land Office was very still while the Commissioner was delving
into the heart of the mass of evidence. The pigeons could be heard on the roof
of the old, castle-like building, cooing and fretting. The clerks were droning
everywhere, scarcely pretending to earn their salaries. Each little sound echoed

hollow and loud from the bare, stone-flagged floors, the plastered walls, and
the iron-joisted ceiling. The impalpable, perpetual limestone dust that never
settled, whitened a long streamer of sunlight that pierced the tattered windowawning.
It seemed that Hamlin and Avery had builded well. The Denny survey was
carelessly made, even for a careless period. Its beginning corner was identical
with that of a well-defined old Spanish grant, but its other calls were sinfully
vague. The field notes contained no other object that survived—no tree, no
natural object save Chiquito River, and it was a mile wrong there. According
to precedent, the Office would be justified in giving it its complement by
course and distance, and considering the remainder vacant instead of a mere
excess.
The Actual Settler was besieging the office with wild protests in re. Having
the nose of a pointer and the eye of a hawk for the land-shark, he had observed
his myrmidons running the lines upon his ground. Making inquiries, he
learned that the spoiler had attacked his home, and he left the plough in the
furrow and took his pen in hand.
One of the protests the Commissioner read twice. It was from a woman, a
widow, the granddaughter of Elias Denny himself. She told how her
grandfather had sold most of the survey years before at a trivial price—land
that was now a principality in extent and value. Her mother had also sold a
part, and she herself had succeeded to this western portion, along Chiquito
River. Much of it she had been forced to part with in order to live, and now
she owned only about three hundred acres, on which she had her home. Her
letter wound up rather pathetically:
"I've got eight children, the oldest fifteen years. I work all day and half the
night to till what little land I can and keep us in clothes and books. I teach my
children too. My neighbours is all poor and has big families. The drought kills
the crops every two or three years and then we has hard times to get enough to
eat. There is ten families on this land what the land-sharks is trying to rob us
of, and all of them got titles from me. I sold to them cheap, and they aint paid
out yet, but part of them is, and if their land should be took from them I would
die. My grandfather was an honest man, and he helped to build up this state,
and he taught his children to be honest, and how could I make it up to them
who bought from me? Mr. Commissioner, if you let them land-sharks take the
roof from over my children and the little from them as they has to live on,
whoever again calls this state great or its government just will have a lie in
their mouths"
The Commissioner laid this letter aside with a sigh. Many, many such letters
he had received. He had never been hurt by them, nor had he ever felt that they
appealed to him personally. He was but the state's servant, and must follow its

laws. And yet, somehow, this reflection did not always eliminate a certain
responsible feeling that hung upon him. Of all the state's officers he was
supremest in his department, not even excepting the Governor. Broad, general
land laws he followed, it was true, but he had a wide latitude in particular
ramifications. Rather than law, what he followed was Rulings: Office Rulings
and precedents. In the complicated and new questions that were being
engendered by the state's development the
Commissioner's ruling was rarely appealed from. Even the courts sustained it
when its equity was apparent.
The Commissioner stepped to the door and spoke to a clerk in the other room
—spoke as he always did, as if he were addressing a prince of the blood:
"Mr. Weldon, will you be kind enough to ask Mr. Ashe, the state school-land
appraiser, to please come to my office as soon as convenient?"
Ashe came quickly from the big table where he was arranging his reports.
"Mr. Ashe," said the Commissioner, "you worked along the Chiquito River, in
Salado County, during your last trip, I believe. Do you remember anything of
the Elias Denny three-league survey?"
"Yes, sir, I do," the blunt, breezy, surveyor answered. "I crossed it on my way
to Block H, on the north side of it. The road runs with the Chiquito River,
along the valley. The Denny survey fronts three miles on the Chiquito."
"It is claimed," continued the commissioner, "that it fails to reach the river by
as much as a mile."
The appraiser shrugged his shoulder. He was by birth and instinct an Actual
Settler, and the natural foe of the land-shark.
"It has always been considered to extend to the river," he said, dryly.
"But that is not the point I desired to discuss," said the Commissioner. "What
kind of country is this valley portion of (let us say, then) the Denny tract?"
The spirit of the Actual Settler beamed in Ashe's face.
"Beautiful," he said, with enthusiasm. "Valley as level as this floor, with just a
little swell on, like the sea, and rich as cream. Just enough brakes to shelter the
cattle in winter. Black loamy soil for six feet, and then clay. Holds water. A
dozen nice little houses on it, with windmills and gardens. People pretty poor,
I guess—too far from market—but comfortable. Never saw so many kids in
my life."
"They raise flocks?" inquired the Commissioner.
"Ho, ho! I mean two-legged kids," laughed the surveyor; "two-legged, and
bare-legged, and tow-headed."

"Children! oh, children!" mused the Commissioner, as though a new view had
opened to him; "they raise children!
"It's a lonesome country, Commissioner," said the surveyor. "Can you blame
'em?"
"I suppose," continued the Commissioner, slowly, as one carefully pursues
deductions from a new, stupendous theory, "not all of them are tow-headed. It
would not be unreasonable, Mr. Ashe, I conjecture, to believe that a portion of
them have brown, or even black, hair."
"Brown and black, sure," said Ashe; "also red."
"No doubt," said the Commissioner. "Well, I thank you for your courtesy in
informing me, Mr. Ashe. I will not detain you any longer from your duties."
Later, in the afternoon, came Hamlin and Avery, big, handsome, genial,
sauntering men, clothed in white duck and low-cut shoes. They permeated the
whole office with an aura of debonair prosperity. They passed among the
clerks and left a wake of abbreviated given names and fat brown cigars.
These were the aristocracy of the land-sharks, who went in for big things. Full
of serene confidence in themselves, there was no corporation, no syndicate, no
railroad company or attorney general too big for them to tackle. The peculiar
smoke of their rare, fat brown cigars was to be perceived in the sanctum of
every department of state, in every committee-room of the Legislature, in
every bank parlour and every private caucus-room in the state Capital. Always
pleasant, never in a hurry, in seeming to possess unlimited leisure, people
wondered when they gave their attention to the many audacious enterprises in
which they were known to be engaged.
By and by the two dropped carelessly into the Commissioner's room and
reclined lazily in the big, leather-upholstered arm-chairs. They drawled a
good-natured complaint of the weather, and Hamlin told the Commissioner an
excellent story he had amassed that morning from the Secretary of State.
But the Commissioner knew why they were there. He had half promised to
render a decision that day upon their location.
The chief clerk now brought in a batch of duplicate certificates for the
Commissioner to sign. As he traced his sprawling signature, "Hollis
Summerfield, Comr. Genl. Land Office," on each one, the chief clerk stood,
deftly removing them and applying the blotter.
"I notice," said the chief clerk, "you've been going through that Salado County
location. Kampfer is making a new map of Salado, and I believe is platting in
that section of the county now."
"I will see it," said the Commissioner. A few moments later he went to the
draughtsmen's room.

As he entered he saw five or six of the draughtsmen grouped about Kampfer's
desk, gargling away at each other in pectoral German, and gazing at something
thereupon. At the Commissioner's approach they scattered to their several
places. Kampfer, a wizened little German, with long, frizzled ringlets and a
watery eye, began to stammer forth some sort of an apology, the
Commissioner thought, for the congregation of his fellows about his desk.
"Never mind," said the Commissioner, "I wish to see the map you are
making"; and, passing around the old German, seated himself upon the high
draughtsman's stool. Kampfer continued to break English in trying to explain.
"Herr Gommissioner, I assure you blenty sat I haf not it bremeditated—sat it
wass—sat it itself make. Look you! from se field notes wass it blatted—blease
to observe se calls: South, 10 degrees west 1,050 varas; south, 10 degrees east
300 varas; south, 100; south, 9 west, 200; south, 40 degrees west 400—and so
on. Herr Gommissioner, nefer would I have—"
The Commissioner raised one white hand, silently, Kampfer dropped his pipe
and fled.
With a hand at each side of his face, and his elbows resting upon the desk, the
Commissioner sat staring at the map which was spread and fastened there—
staring at the sweet and living profile of little Georgia drawn thereupon—at
her face, pensive, delicate, and infantile, outlined in a perfect likeness.
When his mind at length came to inquire into the reason of it, he saw that it
must have been, as Kampfer had said, unpremeditated. The old draughtsman
had been platting in the Elias Denny survey, and Georgia's likeness, striking
though it was, was formed by nothing more than the meanders of Chiquito
River. Indeed, Kampfer's blotter, whereon his preliminary work was done,
showed the laborious tracings of the calls and the countless pricks of the
compasses. Then, over his faint pencilling, Kampfer had drawn in India ink
with a full, firm pen the similitude of Chiquito River, and forth had blossomed
mysteriously the dainty, pathetic profile of the child.
The Commissioner sat for half an hour with his face in his hands, gazing
downward, and none dared approach him. Then he arose and walked out. In
the business office he paused long enough to ask that the Denny file be
brought to his desk.
He found Hamlin and Avery still reclining in their chairs, apparently oblivious
of business. They were lazily discussing summer opera, it being, their habit—
perhaps their pride also—to appear supernaturally indifferent whenever they
stood with large interests imperilled. And they stood to win more on this stake
than most people knew. They possessed inside information to the effect that a
new railroad would, within a year, split this very Chiquito River valley and
send land values ballooning all along its route. A dollar under thirty thousand

profit on this location, if it should hold good, would be a loss to their
expectations. So, while they chatted lightly and waited for the Commissioner
to open the subject, there was a quick, sidelong sparkle in their eyes, evincing
a desire to read their title clear to those fair acres on the Chiquito.
A clerk brought in the file. The Commissioner seated himself and wrote upon
it in red ink. Then he rose to his feet and stood for a while looking straight out
of the window. The Land Office capped the summit of a bold hill. The eyes of
the Commissioner passed over the roofs of many houses set in a packing of
deep green, the whole checkered by strips of blinding white streets. The
horizon, where his gaze was focussed, swelled to a fair wooded eminence
flecked with faint dots of shining white. There was the cemetery, where lay
many who were forgotten, and a few who had not lived in vain. And one lay
there, occupying very small space, whose childish heart had been large enough
to desire, while near its last beats, good to others. The Commissioner's lips
moved slightly as he whispered to himself: "It was her last will and testament,
and I have neglected it so long!"
The big brown cigars of Hamlin and Avery were fireless, but they still gripped
them between their teeth and waited, while they marvelled at the absent
expression upon the Commissioner's face.
By and by he spoke suddenly and promptly.
"Gentlemen, I have just indorsed the Elias Denny survey for patenting. This
office will not regard your location upon a part of it as legal." He paused a
moment, and then, extending his hand as those dear old-time ones used to do
in debate, he enunciated the spirit of that Ruling that subsequently drove the
land-sharks to the wall, and placed the seal of peace and security over the
doors of ten thousand homes.
"And, furthermore," he continued, with a clear, soft light upon his face, "it
may interest you to know that from this time on this office will consider that
when a survey of land made by virtue of a certificate granted by this state to
the men who wrested it from the wilderness and the savage—made in good
faith, settled in good faith, and left in good faith to their children or innocent
purchasers—when such a survey, although overrunning its complement, shall
call for any natural object visible to the eye of man, to that object it shall hold,
and be good and valid. And the children of this state shall lie down to sleep at
night, and rumours of disturbers of title shall not disquiet them. For,"
concluded the Commissioner, "of such is the Kingdom of Heaven."
In the silence that followed, a laugh floated up from the patent-room below.
The man who carried down the Denny file was exhibiting it among the clerks.
"Look here," he said, delightedly, "the old man has forgotten his name. He's
written 'Patent to original grantee,' and signed it 'Georgia Summerfield,

Comr."'
The speech of the Commissioner rebounded lightly from the impregnable
Hamlin and Avery. They smiled, rose gracefully, spoke of the baseball team,
and argued feelingly that quite a perceptible breeze had arisen from the east.
They lit fresh fat brown cigars, and drifted courteously away. But later they
made another tiger-spring for their quarry in the courts. But the courts,
according to reports in the papers, "coolly roasted them" (a remarkable
performance, suggestive of liquid-air didoes), and sustained the
Commissioner's Ruling.
And this Ruling itself grew to be a Precedent, and the Actual Settler framed it,
and taught his children to spell from it, and there was sound sleep o' nights
from the pines to the sage-brush, and from the chaparral to the great brown
river of the north.
But I think, and I am sure the Commissioner never thought otherwise, that
whether Kampfer was a snuffy old instrument of destiny, or whether the
meanders of the Chiquito accidentally platted themselves into that memorable
sweet profile or not, there was brought about "something good for a whole lot
of children," and the result ought to be called "Georgia's Ruling."

XXIII
BLIND MAN'S HOLIDAY
Alas for the man and for the artist with the shifting point of perspective! Life
shall be a confusion of ways to the one; the landscape shall rise up and
confound the other. Take the case of Lorison. At one time he appeared to
himself to be the feeblest of fools; at another he conceived that he followed
ideals so fine that the world was not yet ready to accept them. During one
mood he cursed his folly; possessed by the other, he bore himself with a serene
grandeur akin to greatness: in neither did he attain the perspective.
Generations before, the name had been "Larsen." His race had bequeathed him
its fine-strung, melancholy temperament, its saving balance of thrift and
industry.
From his point of perspective he saw himself an outcast from society, forever
to be a shady skulker along the ragged edge of respectability; a denizen des
trois-quartz de monde, that pathetic spheroid lying between the haut and the
demi, whose inhabitants envy each of their neighbours, and are scorned by
both. He was self-condemned to this opinion, as he was self-exiled, through it,
to this quaint Southern city a thousand miles from his former home. Here he
had dwelt for longer than a year, knowing but few, keeping in a subjective

world of shadows which was invaded at times by the perplexing bulks of
jarring realities. Then he fell in love with a girl whom he met in a cheap
restaurant, and his story begins.
The Rue Chartres, in New Orleans, is a street of ghosts. It lies in the quarter
where the Frenchman, in his prime, set up his translated pride and glory;
where, also, the arrogant don had swaggered, and dreamed of gold and grants
and ladies' gloves. Every flagstone has its grooves worn by footsteps going
royally to the wooing and the fighting. Every house has a princely heartbreak;
each doorway its untold tale of gallant promise and slow decay.
By night the Rue Chartres is now but a murky fissure, from which the groping
wayfarer sees, flung against the sky, the tangled filigree of Moorish iron
balconies. The old houses of monsieur stand yet, indomitable against the
century, but their essence is gone. The street is one of ghosts to whosoever can
see them.
A faint heartbeat of the street's ancient glory still survives in a corner occupied
by the Café Carabine d'Or. Once men gathered there to plot against kings, and
to warn presidents. They do so yet, but they are not the same kind of men. A
brass button will scatter these; those would have set their faces against an
army. Above the door hangs the sign board, upon which has been depicted a
vast animal of unfamiliar species. In the act of firing upon this monster is
represented an unobtrusive human levelling an obtrusive gun, once the colour
of bright gold. Now the legend above the picture is faded beyond conjecture;
the gun's relation to the title is a matter of faith; the menaced animal, wearied
of the long aim of the hunter, has resolved itself into a shapeless blot.
The place is known as "Antonio's," as the name, white upon the red-lit
transparency, and gilt upon the windows, attests. There is a promise in
"Antonio"; a justifiable expectancy of savoury things in oil and pepper and
wine, and perhaps an angel's whisper of garlic. But the rest of the name is
"O'Riley." Antonio O'Riley!
The Carabine d'Or is an ignominious ghost of the Rue Chartres. The café
where Bienville and Conti dined, where a prince has broken bread, is become
a "family ristaurant."
Its customers are working men and women, almost to a unit. Occasionally you
will see chorus girls from the cheaper theatres, and men who follow
avocations subject to quick vicissitudes; but at Antonio's—name rich in
Bohemian promise, but tame in fulfillment—manners debonair and gay are
toned down to the "family" standard. Should you light a cigarette, mine host
will touch you on the "arrum" and remind you that the proprieties are
menaced. "Antonio" entices and beguiles from fiery legend without, but
"O'Riley" teaches decorum within.

It was at this restaurant that Lorison first saw the girl. A flashy fellow with a
predatory eye had followed her in, and had advanced to take the other chair at
the little table where she stopped, but Lorison slipped into the seat before him.
Their acquaintance began, and grew, and now for two months they had sat at
the same table each evening, not meeting by appointment, but as if by a series
of fortuitous and happy accidents. After dining, they would take a walk
together in one of the little city parks, or among the panoramic markets where
exhibits a continuous vaudeville of sights and sounds. Always at eight o'clock
their steps led them to a certain street corner, where she prettily but firmly
bade him good night and left him. "I do not live far from here," she frequently
said, "and you must let me go the rest of the way alone."
But now Lorison had discovered that he wanted to go the rest of the way with
her, or happiness would depart, leaving, him on a very lonely corner of life.
And at the same time that he made the discovery, the secret of his banishment
from the society of the good laid its finger in his face and told him it must not
be.
Man is too thoroughly an egoist not to be also an egotist; if he love, the object
shall know it. During a lifetime he may conceal it through stress of expediency
and honour, but it shall bubble from his dying lips, though it disrupt a
neighbourhood. It is known, however, that most men do not wait so long to
disclose their passion. In the case of Lorison, his particular ethics positively
forbade him to declare his sentiments, but he must needs dally with the
subject, and woo by innuendo at least.
On this night, after the usual meal at the Carabine d'Or, he strolled with his
companion down the dim old street toward the river.
The Rue Chartres perishes in the old Place d'Armes. The ancient Cabildo,
where Spanish justice fell like hail, faces it, and the Cathedral, another
provincial ghost, overlooks it. Its centre is a little, iron-railed park of flowers
and immaculate gravelled walks, where citizens take the air of evenings.
Pedestalled high above it, the general sits his cavorting steed, with his face
turned stonily down the river toward English Turn, whence come no more
Britons to bombard his cotton bales.
Often the two sat in this square, but to-night Lorison guided her past the stonestepped gate, and still riverward. As they walked, he smiled to himself to think
that all he knew of her—except that be loved her—was her name, Norah
Greenway, and that she lived with her brother. They had talked about
everything except themselves. Perhaps her reticence had been caused by his.
They came, at length, upon the levee, and sat upon a great, prostrate beam.
The air was pungent with the dust of commerce. The great river slipped
yellowly past. Across it Algiers lay, a longitudinous black bulk against a

vibrant electric haze sprinkled with exact stars.
The girl was young and of the piquant order. A certain bright melancholy
pervaded her; she possessed an untarnished, pale prettiness doomed to please.
Her voice, when she spoke, dwarfed her theme. It was the voice capable of
investing little subjects with a large interest. She sat at ease, bestowing her
skirts with the little womanly touch, serene as if the begrimed pier were a
summer garden. Lorison poked the rotting boards with his cane.
He began by telling her that he was in love with some one to whom he durst
not speak of it. "And why not?" she asked, accepting swiftly his fatuous
presentation of a third person of straw. "My place in the world," he answered,
"is none to ask a woman to share. I am an outcast from honest people; I am
wrongly accused of one crime, and am, I believe, guilty of another."
Thence he plunged into the story of his abdication from society. The story,
pruned of his moral philosophy, deserves no more than the slightest touch. It is
no new tale, that of the gambler's declension. During one night's sitting he lost,
and then had imperilled a certain amount of his employer's money, which, by
accident, he carried with him. He continued to lose, to the last wager, and then
began to gain, leaving the game winner to a somewhat formidable sum. The
same night his employer's safe was robbed. A search was had; the winnings of
Lorison were found in his room, their total forming an accusative nearness to
the sum purloined. He was taken, tried and, through incomplete evidence,
released, smutched with the sinister devoirs of a disagreeing jury.
"It is not in the unjust accusation," he said to the girl, "that my burden lies, but
in the knowledge that from the moment I staked the first dollar of the firm's
money I was a criminal—no matter whether I lost or won. You see why it is
impossible for me to speak of love to her."
"It is a sad thing," said Norah, after a little pause, "to think what very good
people there are in the world."
"Good?" said Lorison.
"I was thinking of this superior person whom you say you love. She must be a
very poor sort of creature."
"I do not understand."
"Nearly," she continued, "as poor a sort of creature as yourself."
"You do not understand," said Lorison, removing his hat and sweeping back
his fine, light hair. "Suppose she loved me in return, and were willing to marry
me. Think, if you can, what would follow. Never a day would pass but she
would be reminded of her sacrifice. I would read a condescension in her smile,
a pity even in her affection, that would madden me. No. The thing would stand
between us forever. Only equals should mate. I could never ask her to come

down upon my lower plane."
An arc light faintly shone upon Lorison's face. An illumination from within
also pervaded it. The girl saw the rapt, ascetic look; it was the face either of
Sir Galahad or Sir Fool.
"Quite starlike," she said, "is this unapproachable angel. Really too high to be
grasped."
"By me, yes."
She faced him suddenly. "My dear friend, would you prefer your star fallen?"
Lorison made a wide gesture.
"You push me to the bald fact," he declared; "you are not in sympathy with my
argument. But I will answer you so. If I could reach my particular star, to drag
it down, I would not do it; but if it were fallen, I would pick it up, and thank
Heaven for the privilege."
They were silent for some minutes. Norah shivered, and thrust her hands deep
into the pockets of her jacket. Lorison uttered a remorseful exclamation.
"I'm not cold," she said. "I was just thinking. I ought to tell you something.
You have selected a strange confidante. But you cannot expect a chance
acquaintance, picked up in a doubtful restaurant, to be an angel."
"Norah!" cried Lorison.
"Let me go on. You have told me about yourself. We have been such good
friends. I must tell you now what I never wanted you to know. I am—worse
than you are. I was on the stage . . . I sang in the chorus . . . I was pretty bad, I
guess . . . I stole diamonds from the prima donna . . . they arrested me . . . I
gave most of them up, and they let me go . . . I drank wine every night . . . a
great deal . . . I was very wicked, but—"
Lorison knelt quickly by her side and took her hands.
"Dear Norah!" he said, exultantly. "It is you, it is you I love! You never
guessed it, did you? 'Tis you I meant all the time. Now I can speak. Let me
make you forget the past. We have both suffered; let us shut out the world, and
live for each other. Norah, do you hear me say I love you?"
"In spite of—"
"Rather say because of it. You have come out of your past noble and good.
Your heart is an angel's. Give it to me."
"A little while ago you feared the future too much to even speak."
"But for you; not for myself. Can you love me?"
She cast herself, wildly sobbing, upon his breast.
"Better than life—than truth itself—than everything."

"And my own past," said Lorison, with a note of solicitude—"can you forgive
and—"
"I answered you that," she whispered, "when I told you I loved you." She
leaned away, and looked thoughtfully at him. "If I had not told you about
myself, would you have—would you—"
"No," he interrupted; "I would never have let you know I loved you. I would
never have asked you this—Norah, will you be my wife?"
She wept again.
"Oh, believe me; I am good now—I am no longer wicked! I will be the best
wife in the world. Don't think I am—bad any more. If you do I shall die, I
shall die!"
While he was consoling, her, she brightened up, eager and impetuous. "Will
you marry me to-night?" she said. "Will you prove it that way. I have a reason
for wishing it to be to-night. Will you?"
Of one of two things was this exceeding frankness the outcome: either of
importunate brazenness or of utter innocence. The lover's perspective
contained only the one.
"The sooner," said Lorison, "the happier I shall be."
"What is there to do?" she asked. "What do you have to get? Come! You
should know."
Her energy stirred the dreamer to action.
"A city directory first," he cried, gayly, "to find where the man lives who gives
licenses to happiness. We will go together and rout him out. Cabs, cars,
policemen, telephones and ministers shall aid us."
"Father Rogan shall marry us," said the girl, with ardour. "I will take you to
him."
An hour later the two stood at the open doorway of an immense, gloomy brick
building in a narrow and lonely street. The license was tight in Norah's hand.
"Wait here a moment," she said, "till I find Father Rogan."
She plunged into the black hallway, and the lover was left standing, as it were,
on one leg, outside. His impatience was not greatly taxed. Gazing curiously
into what seemed the hallway to Erebus, he was presently reassured by a
stream of light that bisected the darkness, far down the passage. Then he heard
her call, and fluttered lampward, like the moth. She beckoned him through a
doorway into the room whence emanated the light. The room was bare of
nearly everything except books, which had subjugated all its space. Here and
there little spots of territory had been reconquered. An elderly, bald man, with
a superlatively calm, remote eye, stood by a table with a book in his hand, his

finger still marking a page. His dress was sombre and appertained to a
religious order. His eye denoted an acquaintance with the perspective.
"Father Rogan," said Norah, "this is he."
"The two of ye," said Father Rogan, "want to get married?"
They did not deny it. He married them. The ceremony was quickly done. One
who could have witnessed it, and felt its scope, might have trembled at the
terrible inadequacy of it to rise to the dignity of its endless chain of results.
Afterward the priest spake briefly, as if by rote, of certain other civil and legal
addenda that either might or should, at a later time, cap the ceremony. Lorison
tendered a fee, which was declined, and before the door closed after the
departing couple Father Rogan's book popped open again where his finger
marked it.
In the dark hall Norah whirled and clung to her companion, tearful.
"Will you never, never be sorry?"
At last she was reassured.
At the first light they reached upon the street, she asked the time, just as she
had each night. Lorison looked at his watch. Half-past eight.
Lorison thought it was from habit that she guided their steps toward the corner
where they always parted. But, arrived there, she hesitated, and then released
his arm. A drug store stood on the corner; its bright, soft light shone upon
them.
"Please leave me here as usual to-night," said Norah, sweetly. "I must—I
would rather you would. You will not object? At six to-morrow evening I will
meet you at Antonio's. I want to sit with you there once more. And then—I
will go where you say." She gave him a bewildering, bright smile, and walked
swiftly away.
Surely it needed all the strength of her charm to carry off this astounding
behaviour. It was no discredit to Lorison's strength of mind that his head began
to whirl. Pocketing his hands, he rambled vacuously over to the druggist's
windows, and began assiduously to spell over the names of the patent
medicines therein displayed.
As soon as be had recovered his wits, he proceeded along the street in an
aimless fashion. After drifting for two or three squares, he flowed into a
somewhat more pretentious thoroughfare, a way much frequented by him in
his solitary ramblings. For here was a row of shops devoted to traffic in goods
of the widest range of choice—handiworks of art, skill and fancy, products of
nature and labour from every zone.
Here, for a time, he loitered among the conspicuous windows, where was set,

emphasized by congested floods of light, the cunningest spoil of the interiors.
There were few passers, and of this Lorison was glad. He was not of the
world. For a long time he had touched his fellow man only at the gear of a
levelled cog-wheel—at right angles, and upon a different axis. He had dropped
into a distinctly new orbit. The stroke of ill fortune had acted upon him, in
effect, as a blow delivered upon the apex of a certain ingenious toy, the
musical top, which, when thus buffeted while spinning, gives forth, with
scarcely retarded motion, a complete change of key and chord.
Strolling along the pacific avenue, he experienced singular, supernatural calm,
accompanied by an unusual a activity of brain. Reflecting upon recent affairs,
he assured himself of his happiness in having won for a bride the one he had
so greatly desired, yet he wondered mildly at his dearth of active emotion. Her
strange behaviour in abandoning him without valid excuse on his bridal eve
aroused in him only a vague and curious speculation. Again, he found himself
contemplating, with complaisant serenity, the incidents of her somewhat lively
career. His perspective seemed to have been queerly shifted.
As he stood before a window near a corner, his ears were assailed by a waxing
clamour and commotion. He stood close to the window to allow passage to the
cause of the hubbub—a procession of human beings, which rounded the
corner and headed in his direction. He perceived a salient hue of blue and a
glitter of brass about a central figure of dazzling white and silver, and a ragged
wake of black, bobbing figures.
Two ponderous policemen were conducting between them a woman dressed as
if for the stage, in a short, white, satiny skirt reaching to the knees, pink
stockings, and a sort of sleeveless bodice bright with relucent, armour-like
scales. Upon her curly, light hair was perched, at a rollicking angle, a shining
tin helmet. The costume was to be instantly recognized as one of those
amazing conceptions to which competition has harried the inventors of the
spectacular ballet. One of the officers bore a long cloak upon his arm, which,
doubtless, had been intended to veil the I candid attractions of their effulgent
prisoner, but, for some reason, it had not been called into use, to the vociferous
delight of the tail of the procession.
Compelled by a sudden and vigorous movement of the woman, the parade
halted before the window by which Lorison stood. He saw that she was young,
and, at the first glance, was deceived by a sophistical prettiness of her face,
which waned before a more judicious scrutiny. Her look was bold and
reckless, and upon her countenance, where yet the contours of youth survived,
were the finger-marks of old age's credentialed courier, Late Hours.
The young woman fixed her unshrinking gaze upon Lorison, and called to him
in the voice of the wronged heroine in straits:

"Say! You look like a good fellow; come and put up the bail, won't you? I've
done nothing to get pinched for. It's all a mistake. See how they're treating me!
You won't be sorry, if you'll help me out of this. Think of your sister or your
girl being dragged along the streets this way! I say, come along now, like a
good fellow."
It may be that Lorison, in spite of the unconvincing bathos of this appeal,
showed a sympathetic face, for one of the officers left the woman's side, and
went over to him.
"It's all right, Sir," he said, in a husky, confidential tone; "she's the right party.
We took her after the first act at the Green Light Theatre, on a wire from the
chief of police of Chicago. It's only a square or two to the station. Her rig's
pretty bad, but she refused to change clothes—or, rather," added the officer,
with a smile, "to put on some. I thought I'd explain matters to you so you
wouldn't think she was being imposed upon."
"What is the charge?" asked Lorison.
"Grand larceny. Diamonds. Her husband is a jeweller in Chicago. She cleaned
his show case of the sparklers, and skipped with a comic-opera troupe."
The policeman, perceiving that the interest of the entire group of spectators
was centred upon himself and Lorison—their conference being regarded as a
possible new complication—was fain to prolong the situation—which
reflected his own importance—by a little afterpiece of philosophical comment.
"A gentleman like you, Sir," he went on affably, "would never notice it, but it
comes in my line to observe what an immense amount of trouble is made by
that combination—I mean the stage, diamonds and light-headed women who
aren't satisfied with good homes. I tell you, Sir, a man these days and nights
wants to know what his women folks are up to."
The policeman smiled a good night, and returned to the side of his charge,
who had been intently watching Lorison's face during the conversation, no
doubt for some indication of his intention to render succour. Now, at the
failure of the sign, and at the movement made to continue the ignominious
progress, she abandoned hope, and addressed him thus, pointedly:
"You damn chalk-faced quitter! You was thinking of giving me a hand, but
you let the cop talk you out of it the first word. You're a dandy to tie to. Say, if
you ever get a girl, she'll have a picnic. Won't she work you to the queen's
taste! Oh, my!" She concluded with a taunting, shrill laugh that rasped Lorison
like a saw. The policemen urged her forward; the delighted train of gaping
followers closed up the rear; and the captive Amazon, accepting her fate,
extended the scope of her maledictions so that none in hearing might seem to
be slighted.

Then there came upon Lorison an overwhelming revulsion of his perspective.
It may be that he had been ripe for it, that the abnormal condition of mind in
which he had for so long existed was already about to revert to its balance;
however, it is certain that the events of the last few minutes had furnished the
channel, if not the impetus, for the change.
The initial determining influence had been so small a thing as the fact and
manner of his having been approached by the officer. That agent had, by the
style of his accost, restored the loiterer to his former place in society. In an
instant he had been transformed from a somewhat rancid prowler along the
fishy side streets of gentility into an honest gentleman, with whom even so
lordly a guardian of the peace might agreeably exchange the compliments.
This, then, first broke the spell, and set thrilling in him a resurrected longing
for the fellowship of his kind, and the rewards of the virtuous. To what end, he
vehemently asked himself, was this fanciful self-accusation, this empty
renunciation, this moral squeamishness through which he had been led to
abandon what was his heritage in life, and not beyond his deserts? Technically,
he was uncondemned; his sole guilty spot was in thought rather than deed, and
cognizance of it unshared by others. For what good, moral or sentimental, did
he slink, retreating like the hedgehog from his own shadow, to and fro in this
musty Bohemia that lacked even the picturesque?
But the thing that struck home and set him raging was the part played by the
Amazonian prisoner. To the counterpart of that astounding belligerent—
identical at least, in the way of experience—to one, by her own confession,
thus far fallen, had he, not three hours since, been united in marriage. How
desirable and natural it had seemed to him then, and how monstrous it seemed
now! How the words of diamond thief number two yet burned in his ears: "If
you ever get a girl, she'll have a picnic." What did that mean but that women
instinctively knew him for one they could hoodwink? Still again, there
reverberated the policeman's sapient contribution to his agony: "A man these
days and nights wants to know what his women folks are up to." Oh, yes, he
had been a fool; he had looked at things from the wrong standpoint.
But the wildest note in all the clamour was struck by pain's forefinger,
jealousy. Now, at least, he felt that keenest sting—a mounting love unworthily
bestowed. Whatever she might be, he loved her; he bore in his own breast his
doom. A grating, comic flavour to his predicament struck him suddenly, and
he laughed creakingly as he swung down the echoing pavement. An impetuous
desire to act, to battle with his fate, seized him. He stopped upon his heel, and
smote his palms together triumphantly. His wife was—where? But there was a
tangible link; an outlet more or less navigable, through which his derelict ship
of matrimony might yet be safely towed—the priest!
Like all imaginative men with pliable natures, Lorison was, when thoroughly

stirred, apt to become tempestuous. With a high and stubborn indignation upon
him, be retraced his steps to the intersecting street by which he had come.
Down this he hurried to the corner where he had parted with—an astringent
grimace tinctured the thought—his wife. Thence still back he harked,
following through an unfamiliar district his stimulated recollections of the way
they had come from that preposterous wedding. Many times he went abroad,
and nosed his way back to the trail, furious.
At last, when he reached the dark, calamitous building in which his madness
had culminated, and found the black hallway, he dashed down it, perceiving
no light or sound. But he raised his voice, hailing loudly; reckless of
everything but that he should find the old mischief-maker with the eyes that
looked too far away to see the disaster he had wrought. The door opened, and
in the stream of light Father Rogan stood, his book in hand, with his finger
marking the place.
"Ah!" cried Lorison. "You are the man I want. I had a wife of you a few hours
ago. I would not trouble you, but I neglected to note how it was done. Will you
oblige me with the information whether the business is beyond remedy?"
"Come inside," said the priest; "there are other lodgers in the house, who
might prefer sleep to even a gratified curiosity."
Lorison entered the room and took the chair offered him. The priest's eyes
looked a courteous interrogation.
"I must apologize again," said the young man, "for so soon intruding upon you
with my marital infelicities, but, as my wife has neglected to furnish me with
her address, I am deprived of the legitimate recourse of a family row."
"I am quite a plain man," said Father Rogan, pleasantly; "but I do not see how
I am to ask you questions."
"Pardon my indirectness," said Lorison; "I will ask one. In this room to-night
you pronounced me to be a husband. You afterward spoke of additional rites
or performances that either should or could be effected. I paid little attention to
your words then, but I am hungry to hear them repeated now. As matters
stand, am I married past all help?"
"You are as legally and as firmly bound," said the priest, "as though it had
been done in a cathedral, in the presence of thousands. The additional
observances I referred to are not necessary to the strictest legality of the act,
but were advised as a precaution for the future—for convenience of proof in
such contingencies as wills, inheritances and the like."
Lorison laughed harshly.
"Many thanks," he said. "Then there is no mistake, and I am the happy
benedict. I suppose I should go stand upon the bridal corner, and when my

wife gets through walking the streets she will look me up."
Father Rogan regarded him calmly.
"My son," he said, "when a man and woman come to me to be married I
always marry them. I do this for the sake of other people whom they might go
away and marry if they did not marry each other. As you see, I do not seek
your confidence; but your case seems to me to be one not altogether devoid of
interest. Very few marriages that have come to my notice have brought such
well-expressed regret within so short a time. I will hazard one question: were
you not under the impression that you loved the lady you married, at the time
you did so;"
"Loved her!" cried Lorison, wildly. "Never so well as now, though she told me
she deceived and sinned and stole. Never more than now, when, perhaps, she
is laughing at the fool she cajoled and left, with scarcely a word, to return to
God only knows what particular line of her former folly."
Father Rogan answered nothing. During the silence that succeeded, he sat with
a quiet expectation beaming in his full, lambent eye.
"If you would listen—" began Lorison. The priest held up his hand.
"As I hoped," he said. "I thought you would trust me. Wait but a moment." He
brought a long clay pipe, filled and lighted it.
"Now, my son," he said.
Lorison poured a twelve month's accumulated confidence into Father Rogan's
ear. He told all; not sparing himself or omitting the facts of his past, the events
of the night, or his disturbing conjectures and fears.
"The main point," said the priest, when he had concluded, "seems to me to be
this—are you reasonably sure that you love this woman whom you have
married?"
"Why," exclaimed Lorison, rising impulsively to his feet—"why should I deny
it? But look at me—am fish, flesh or fowl? That is the main point to me, I
assure you."
"I understand you," said the priest, also rising, and laying down his pipe. "The
situation is one that has taxed the endurance of much older men than you—in
fact, especially much older men than you. I will try to relieve you from it, and
this night. You shall see for yourself into exactly what predicament you have
fallen, and how you shall, possibly, be extricated. There is no evidence so
credible as that of the eyesight."
Father Rogan moved about the room, and donned a soft black hat. Buttoning
his coat to his throat, he laid his hand on the doorknob. "Let us walk," he said.
The two went out upon the street. The priest turned his face down it, and

Lorison walked with him through a squalid district, where the houses loomed,
awry and desolate-looking, high above them. Presently they turned into a less
dismal side street, where the houses were smaller, and, though hinting of the
most meagre comfort, lacked the concentrated wretchedness of the more
populous byways.
At a segregated, two-story house Father Rogan halted, and mounted the steps
with the confidence of a familiar visitor. He ushered Lorison into a narrow
hallway, faintly lighted by a cobwebbed hanging lamp. Almost immediately a
door to the right opened and a dingy Irishwoman protruded her head.
"Good evening to ye, Mistress Geehan," said the priest, unconsciously, it
seemed, falling into a delicately flavoured brogue. "And is it yourself can tell
me if Norah has gone out again, the night, maybe?"
"Oh, it's yer blissid riverence! Sure and I can tell ye the same. The purty
darlin' wint out, as usual, but a bit later. And she says: 'Mother Geehan,' says
she, 'it's me last noight out, praise the saints, this noight is!' And, oh, yer
riverence, the swate, beautiful drame of a dress she had this toime! White satin
and silk and ribbons, and lace about the neck and arrums—'twas a sin, yer
reverence, the gold was spint upon it."
The priest heard Lorison catch his breath painfully, and a faint smile flickered
across his own clean-cut mouth.
"Well, then, Mistress Geehan," said he, "I'll just step upstairs and see the bit
boy for a minute, and I'll take this gentleman up with me."
"He's awake, thin," said the woman. 'I've just come down from sitting wid him
the last hour, tilling him fine shtories of ould County Tyrone. 'Tis a greedy
gossoon, it is, yer riverence, for me shtories."
"Small the doubt," said Father Rogan. "There's no rocking would put him to
slape the quicker, I'm thinking."
Amid the woman's shrill protest against the retort, the two men ascended the
steep stairway. The priest pushed open the door of a room near its top.
"Is that you already, sister?" drawled a sweet, childish voice from the
darkness.
"It's only ould Father Denny come to see ye, darlin'; and a foine gentleman
I've brought to make ye a gr-r-and call. And ye resaves us fast aslape in bed!
Shame on yez manners!"
"Oh, Father Denny, is that you? I'm glad. And will you light the lamp, please?
It's on the table by the door. And quit talking like Mother Geehan, Father
Denny."
The priest lit the lamp, and Lorison saw a tiny, towsled-haired boy, with a thin,

delicate face, sitting up in a small bed in a corner. Quickly, also, his rapid
glance considered the room and its contents. It was furnished with more than
comfort, and its adornments plainly indicated a woman's discerning taste. An
open door beyond revealed the blackness of an adjoining room's interior.
The boy clutched both of Father Rogan's hands. "I'm so glad you came," he
said; "but why did you come in the night? Did sister send you?"
"Off wid ye! Am I to be sint about, at me age, as was Terence McShane, of
Ballymahone? I come on me own r-r-responsibility."
Lorison had also advanced to the boy's bedside. He was fond of children; and
the wee fellow, laying himself down to sleep alone in that dark room, stirredhis heart.
"Aren't you afraid, little man?" he asked, stooping down beside him.
"Sometimes," answered the boy, with a shy smile, "when the rats make too
much noise. But nearly every night, when sister goes out, Mother Geehan
stays a while with me, and tells me funny stories. I'm not often afraid, sir."
"This brave little gentleman," said Father Rogan, "is a scholar of mine. Every
day from half-past six to half-past eight—when sister comes for him—he
stops in my study, and we find out what's in the inside of books. He knows
multiplication, division and fractions; and he's troubling me to begin wid the
chronicles of Ciaran of Clonmacnoise, Corurac McCullenan and Cuan
O'Lochain, the gr-r-reat Irish histhorians." The boy was evidently accustomed
to the priest's Celtic pleasantries. A little, appreciative grin was all the
attention the insinuation of pedantry received.
Lorison, to have saved his life, could not have put to the child one of those
vital questions that were wildly beating about, unanswered, in his own brain.
The little fellow was very like Norah; he had the same shining hair and candid
eyes.
"Oh, Father Denny," cried the boy, suddenly, "I forgot to tell you! Sister is not
going away at night any more! She told me so when she kissed me good night
as she was leaving. And she said she was so happy, and then she cried. Wasn't
that queer? But I'm glad; aren't you?"
"Yes, lad. And now, ye omadhaun, go to sleep, and say good night; we must be
going."
"Which shall I do first, Father Denny?"
"Faith, he's caught me again! Wait till I get the sassenach into the annals of
Tageruach, the hagiographer; I'll give him enough of the Irish idiom to make
him more respectful."
The light was out, and the small, brave voice bidding them good night from

the dark room. They groped downstairs, and tore away from the garrulity of
Mother Geehan.
Again the priest steered them through the dim ways, but this time in another
direction. His conductor was serenely silent, and Lorison followed his
example to the extent of seldom speaking. Serene he could not be. His heart
beat suffocatingly in his breast. The following of this blind, menacing trail was
pregnant with he knew not what humiliating revelation to be delivered at its
end.
They came into a more pretentious street, where trade, it could be surmised,
flourished by day. And again the priest paused; this time before a lofty
building, whose great doors and windows in the lowest floor were carefully
shuttered and barred. Its higher apertures were dark, save in the third story, the
windows of which were brilliantly lighted. Lorison's ear caught a distant,
regular, pleasing thrumming, as of music above. They stood at an angle of the
building. Up, along the side nearest them, mounted an iron stairway. At its top
was an upright, illuminated parallelogram. Father Rogan had stopped, and
stood, musing.
"I will say this much," he remarked, thoughtfully: "I believe you to be a better
man than you think yourself to be, and a better man than I thought some hours
ago. But do not take this," he added, with a smile, "as much praise. I promised
you a possible deliverance from an unhappy perplexity. I will have to modify
that promise. I can only remove the mystery that enhanced that perplexity.
Your deliverance depends upon yourself. Come."
He led his companion up the stairway. Halfway up, Lorison caught him by the
sleeve. "Remember," he gasped, "I love that woman."
"You desired to know.
"I—Go on."
The priest reached the landing at the top of the stairway. Lorison, behind him,
saw that the illuminated space was the glass upper half of a door opening into
the lighted room. The rhythmic music increased as they neared it; the stairs
shook with the mellow vibrations.
Lorison stopped breathing when he set foot upon the highest step, for the
priest stood aside, and motioned him to look through the glass of the door.
His eye, accustomed to the darkness, met first a blinding glare, and then he
made out the faces and forms of many people, amid an extravagant display of
splendid robings—billowy laces, brilliant-hued finery, ribbons, silks and misty
drapery. And then he caught the meaning of that jarring hum, and he saw the
tired, pale, happy face of his wife, bending, as were a score of others, over her
sewing machine—toiling, toiling. Here was the folly she pursued, and the end

of his quest.
But not his deliverance, though even then remorse struck him. His shamed
soul fluttered once more before it retired to make room for the other and better
one. For, to temper his thrill of joy, the shine of the satin and the glimmer of
ornaments recalled the disturbing figure of the bespangled Amazon, and the
base duplicate histories lit by the glare of footlights and stolen diamonds. It is
past the wisdom of him who only sets the scenes, either to praise or blame the
man. But this time his love overcame his scruples. He took a quick step, and
reached out his hand for the doorknob. Father Rogan was quicker to arrest it
and draw him back.
"You use my trust in you queerly," said the priest sternly. "What are you about
to do?"
"I am going to my wife," said Lorison. "Let me pass."
"Listen," said the priest, holding him firmly by the arm. "I am about to put you
in possession of a piece of knowledge of which, thus far, you have scarcely
proved deserving. I do not think you ever will; but I will not dwell upon that.
You see in that room the woman you married, working for a frugal living for
herself, and a generous comfort for an idolized brother. This building belongs
to the chief costumer of the city. For months the advance orders for the
coming Mardi Gras festivals have kept the work going day and night. I myself
secured employment here for Norah. She toils here each night from nine
o'clock until daylight, and, besides, carries home with her some of the finer
costumes, requiring more delicate needlework, and works there part of the day.
Somehow, you two have remained strangely ignorant of each other's lives. Are
you convinced now that your wife is not walking the streets?"
"Let me go to her," cried Lorison, again struggling, "and beg her forgiveness!'
"Sir," said the priest, "do you owe me nothing? Be quiet. It seems so often that
Heaven lets fall its choicest gifts into hands that must be taught to hold them.
Listen again. You forgot that repentant sin must not compromise, but look up,
for redemption, to the purest and best. You went to her with the fine-spun
sophistry that peace could be found in a mutual guilt; and she, fearful of losing
what her heart so craved, thought it worth the price to buy it with a desperate,
pure, beautiful lie. I have known her since the day she was born; she is as
innocent and unsullied in life and deed as a holy saint. In that lowly street
where she dwells she first saw the light, and she has lived there ever since,
spending her days in generous self-sacrifice for others. Och, ye spalpeen!"
continued Father Rogan, raising his finger in kindly anger at Lorison. "What
for, I wonder, could she be after making a fool of hersilf, and shamin' her
swate soul with lies, for the like of you!"
"Sir," said Lorison, trembling, "say what you please of me. Doubt it as you

must, I will yet prove my gratitude to you, and my devotion to her. But let me
speak to her once now, let me kneel for just one moment at her feet, and—"
"Tut, tut!" said the priest. "How many acts of a love drama do you think an old
bookworm like me capable of witnessing? Besides, what kind of figures do we
cut, spying upon the mysteries of midnight millinery! Go to meet your wife tomorrow, as she ordered you, and obey her thereafter, and maybe some time I
shall get forgiveness for the part I have played in this night's work. Off wid
yez down the shtairs, now! 'Tis late, and an ould man like me should be takin'
his rest."

XXIV
MADAME BO-PEEP, OF THE RANCHES
"Aunt Ellen," said Octavia, cheerfully, as she threw her black kid gloves
carefully at the dignified Persian cat on the window-seat, "I'm a pauper."
"You are so extreme in your statements, Octavia, dear," said Aunt Ellen,
mildly, looking up from her paper. "If you find yourself temporarily in need of
some small change for bonbons, you will find my purse in the drawer of the
writing desk."
Octavia Beaupree removed her hat and seated herself on a footstool near her
aunt's chair, clasping her hands about her knees. Her slim and flexible figure,
clad in a modish mourning costume, accommodated itself easily and
gracefully to the trying position. Her bright and youthful face, with its pair of
sparkling, life-enamoured eyes, tried to compose itself to the seriousness that
the occasion seemed to demand.
"You good auntie, it isn't a case of bonbons; it is abject, staring, unpicturesque
poverty, with ready-made clothes, gasolined gloves, and probably one o'clock
dinners all waiting with the traditional wolf at the door. I've just come from
my lawyer, auntie, and, 'Please, ma'am, I ain't got nothink 't all. Flowers, lady?
Buttonhole, gentleman? Pencils, sir, three for five, to help a poor widow?' Do I
do it nicely, auntie, or, as a bread-winner accomplishment, were my lessons in
elocution entirely wasted?"
"Do be serious, my dear," said Aunt Ellen, letting her paper fall to the floor,
"long enough to tell me what you mean. Colonel Beaupree's estate—"
"Colonel Beaupree's estate," interrupted Octavia, emphasizing her words with
appropriate dramatic gestures, "is of Spanish castellar architecture. Colonel
Beaupree's resources are—wind. Colonel Beaupree's stocks are—water.
Colonel Beaupree's income is—all in. The statement lacks the legal

technicalities to which I have been listening for an hour, but that is what it
means when translated."
"Octavia!" Aunt Ellen was now visibly possessed by consternation. "I can
hardly believe it. And it was the impression that he was worth a million. And
the De Peysters themselves introduced him!"
Octavia rippled out a laugh, and then became properly grave.
"De mortuis nil, auntie—not even the rest of it. The dear old colonel—what a
gold brick he was, after all! I paid for my bargain fairly—I'm all here, am I
not?—items: eyes, fingers, toes, youth, old family, unquestionable position in
society as called for in the contract—no wild-cat stock here." Octavia picked
up the morning paper from the floor. "But I'm not going to 'squeal'—isn't that
what they call it when you rail at Fortune because you've, lost the game?" She
turned the pages of the paper calmly. "'Stock market'—no use for that.
'Society's doings'—that's done. Here is my page— the wish column. A Van
Dresser could not be said to 'want' for anything, of course. 'Chamber-maids,
cooks, canvassers, stenographers—'"
"Dear," said Aunt Ellen, with a little tremor in her voice, "please do not talk in
that way. Even if your affairs are in so unfortunate a condition, there is my
three thousand—"
Octavia sprang up lithely, and deposited a smart kiss on the delicate cheek of
the prim little elderly maid.
"Blessed auntie, your three thousand is just sufficient to insure your Hyson to
be free from willow leaves and keep the Persian in sterilized cream. I know I'd
be welcome, but I prefer to strike bottom like Beelzebub rather than hang
around like the Peri listening to the music from the side entrance. I'm going to
earn my own living. There's nothing else to do. I'm a—Oh, oh, oh!—I had
forgotten. There's one thing saved from the wreck. It's a corral—no, a ranch in
—let me see—Texas: an asset, dear old Mr. Bannister called it. How pleased
he was to show me something he could describe as unencumbered! I've a
description of it among those stupid papers he made me bring away with me
from his office. I'll try to find it."
Octavia found her shopping-bag, and drew from it a long envelope filled with
typewritten documents.
"A ranch in Texas," sighed Aunt Ellen. "It sounds to me more like a liability
than an asset. Those are the places where the centipedes are found, and
cowboys, and fandangos."
"'The Rancho de las Sombras,'" read Octavia from a sheet of violently purple
typewriting, "'is situated one hundred and ten miles southeast of San Antonio,
and thirty-eight miles from its nearest railroad station, Nopal, on the I. and G.

N. Ranch, consists of 7,680 acres of well-watered land, with title conferred by
State patents, and twenty-two sections, or 14,080 acres, partly under yearly
running lease and partly bought under State's twenty-year-purchase act. Eight
thousand graded merino sheep, with the necessary equipment of horses,
vehicles and general ranch paraphernalia. Ranch-house built of brick, with six
rooms comfortably furnished according to the requirements of the climate. All
within a strong barbed-wire fence.
"'The present ranch manager seems to be competent and reliable, and is
rapidly placing upon a paying basis a business that, in other hands, had been
allowed to suffer from neglect and misconduct.
"'This property was secured by Colonel Beaupree in a deal with a Western
irrigation syndicate, and the title to it seems to be perfect. With careful
management and the natural increase of land values, it ought to be made the
foundation for a comfortable fortune for its owner.'"
When Octavia ceased reading, Aunt Ellen uttered something as near a sniff as
her breeding permitted.
"The prospectus," she said, with uncompromising metropolitan suspicion,
"doesn't mention the centipedes, or the Indians. And you never did like
mutton, Octavia. I don't see what advantage you can derive from this—desert."
But Octavia was in a trance. Her eyes were steadily regarding something quite
beyond their focus. Her lips were parted, and her face was lighted by the
kindling furor of the explorer, the ardent, stirring disquiet of the adventurer.
Suddenly she clasped her hands together exultantly.
"The problem solves itself, auntie," she cried. "I'm going to that ranch. I'm
going to live on it. I'm going to learn to like mutton, and even concede the
good qualities of centipedes—at a respectful distance. It's just what I need. It's
a new life that comes when my old one is just ending. It's a release, auntie; it
isn't a narrowing. Think of the gallops over those leagues of prairies, with the
wind tugging at the roots of your hair, the coming close to the earth and
learning over again the stories of the growing grass and the little wild flowers
without names! Glorious is what it will be. Shall I be a shepherdess with a
Watteau hat, and a crook to keep the bad wolves from the lambs, or a typical
Western ranch girl, with short hair, like the pictures of her in the Sunday
papers? I think the latter. And they'll have my picture, too, with the wild-cats
I've slain, single-handed, hanging from my saddle horn. 'From the Four
Hundred to the Flocks' is the way they'll headline it, and they'll print
photographs of the old Van Dresser mansion and the church where I was
married. They won't have my picture, but they'll get an artist to draw it. I'll be
wild and woolly, and I'll grow my own wool."
"Octavia!" Aunt Ellen condensed into the one word all the protests she was

unable to utter.
"Don't say a word, auntie. I'm going. I'll see the sky at night fit down on the
world like a big butter-dish cover, and I'll make friends again with the stars
that I haven't had a chat with since I was a wee child. I wish to go. I'm tired of
all this. I'm glad I haven't any money. I could bless Colonel Beaupree for that
ranch, and forgive him for all his bubbles. What if the life will be rough and
lonely! I—I deserve it. I shut my heart to everything except that miserable
ambition. I—oh, I wish to go away, and forget—forget!"
Octavia swerved suddenly to her knees, laid her flushed face in her aunt's lap,
and shook with turbulent sobs.
Aunt Ellen bent over her, and smoothed the coppery-brown hair.
"I didn't know," she said, gently; "I didn't know—that. Who was it, dear?"
When Mrs. Octavia Beaupree, née Van Dresser, stepped from the train at
Nopal, her manner lost, for the moment, some of that easy certitude which had
always marked her movements. The town was of recent establishment, and
seemed to have been hastily constructed of undressed lumber and flapping
canvas. The element that had congregated about the station, though not
offensively demonstrative, was clearly composed of citizens accustomed to
and prepared for rude alarms.
Octavia stood on the platform, against the telegraph office, and attempted to
choose by intuition from the swaggering, straggling string of loungers, the
manager of the Rancho de las Sombras, who had been instructed by Mr.
Bannister to meet her there. That tall, serious, looking, elderly man in the blue
flannel shirt and white tie she thought must be he. But, no; he passed by,
removing his gaze from the lady as hers rested on him, according to the
Southern custom. The manager, she thought, with some impatience at being
kept waiting, should have no difficulty in selecting her. Young women wearing
the most recent thing in ash-coloured travelling suits were not so plentiful in
Nopal!
Thus keeping a speculative watch on all persons of possible managerial aspect,
Octavia, with a catching breath and a start of surprise, suddenly became aware
of Teddy Westlake hurrying along the platform in the direction of the train—of
Teddy Westlake or his sun-browned ghost in cheviot, boots and leather-girdled
hat—Theodore Westlake, Jr., amateur polo (almost) champion, all-round
butterfly and cumberer of the soil; but a broader, surer, more emphasized and
determined Teddy than the one she had known a year ago when last she saw
him.
He perceived Octavia at almost the same time, deflected his course, and
steered for her in his old, straightforward way. Something like awe came upon

her as the strangeness of his metamorphosis was brought into closer range; the
rich, red-brown of his complexion brought out so vividly his straw-coloured
mustache and steel-gray eyes. He seemed more grown-up, and, somehow,
farther away. But, when he spoke, the old, boyish Teddy came back again.
They had been friends from childhood.
"Why, 'Tave!" he exclaimed, unable to reduce his perplexity to coherence.
"How—what—when—where?"
"Train," said Octavia; "necessity; ten minutes ago; home. Your complexion's
gone, Teddy. Now, how—what—when—where?"
"I'm working down here," said Teddy. He cast side glances about the station as
one does who tries to combine politeness with duty.
"You didn't notice on the train," he asked, "an old lady with gray curls and a
poodle, who occupied two seats with her bundles and quarrelled with the
conductor, did you?"
"I think not," answered Octavia, reflecting. "And you haven't, by any chance,
noticed a big, gray-mustached man in a blue shirt and six-shooters, with little
flakes of merino wool sticking in his hair, have you?"
"Lots of 'em," said Teddy, with symptoms of mental delirium under the strain.
Do you happen to know any such individual?"
"No; the description is imaginary. Is your interest in the old lady whom you
describe a personal one?"
"Never saw her in my life. She's painted entirely from fancy. She owns the
little piece of property where I earn my bread and butter—the Rancho de las
Sombras. I drove up to meet her according to arrangement with her lawyer."
Octavia leaned against the wall of the telegraph office. Was this possible? And
didn't he know?
"Are you the manager of that ranch?" she asked weakly.
"I am," said Teddy, with pride.
"I am Mrs. Beaupree," said Octavia faintly; "but my hair never would curl, and
I was polite to the conductor."
For a moment that strange, grown-up look came back, and removed Teddy
miles away from her.
"I hope you'll excuse me," he said, rather awkwardly. "You see, I've been
down here in the chaparral a year. I hadn't heard. Give me your checks, please,
and I'll have your traps loaded into the wagon. José will follow with them. We
travel ahead in the buckboard."
Seated by Teddy in a feather-weight buckboard, behind a pair of wild, cream-

coloured Spanish ponies, Octavia abandoned all thought for the exhilaration of
the present. They swept out of the little town and down the level road toward
the south. Soon the road dwindled and disappeared, and they struck across a
world carpeted with an endless reach of curly mesquite grass. The wheels
made no sound. The tireless ponies bounded ahead at an unbroken gallop. The
temperate wind, made fragrant by thousands of acres of blue and yellow wild
flowers, roared gloriously in their ears. The motion was aërial, ecstatic, with a
thrilling sense of perpetuity in its effect. Octavia sat silent, possessed by a
feeling of elemental, sensual bliss. Teddy seemed to be wrestling with some
internal problem.
"I'm going to call you madama," he announced as the result of his labours.
"That is what the Mexicans will call you—they're nearly all Mexicans on the
ranch, you know. That seems to me about the proper thing."
"Very well, Mr. Westlake," said Octavia, primly.
"Oh, now," said Teddy, in some consternation, "that's carrying the thing too
far, isn't it?"
"Don't worry me with your beastly etiquette. I'm just beginning to live. Don't
remind me of anything artificial. If only this air could be bottled! This much
alone is worth coming for. Oh, look I there goes a deer!"
"Jack-rabbit," said Teddy, without turning his head.
"Could I—might I drive?" suggested Octavia, panting, with rose-tinted cheeks
and the eye of an eager child.
"On one condition. Could I—might I smoke?"
"Forever!" cried Octavia, taking the lines with solemn joy. "How shall I know
which way to drive?"
"Keep her sou' by sou'east, and all sail set. You see that black speck on the
horizon under that lowermost Gulf cloud? That's a group of live-oaks and a
landmark. Steer halfway between that and the little hill to the left. I'll recite
you the whole code of driving rules for the Texas prairies: keep the reins from
under the horses' feet, and swear at 'em frequent."
"I'm too happy to swear, Ted. Oh, why do people buy yachts or travel in
palace-cars, when a buckboard and a pair of plugs and a spring morning like
this can satisfy all desire?"
"Now, I'll ask you," protested Teddy, who was futilely striking match after
match on the dashboard, "not to call those denizens of the air plugs. They can
kick out a hundred miles between daylight and dark." At last he succeeded in
snatching a light for his cigar from the flame held in the hollow of his hands.
"Room!" said Octavia, intensely. "That's what produces the effect. I know now

what I've wanted—scope—range—room!"
"Smoking-room," said Teddy, unsentimentally. "I love to smoke in a
buckboard. The wind blows the smoke into you and out again. It saves
exertion."
The two fell so naturally into their old-time goodfellowship that it was only by
degrees that a sense of the strangeness of the new relations between them
came to be felt.
"Madama," said Teddy, wonderingly, "however did you get it into your bead to
cut the crowd and come down here? Is it a fad now among the upper classes to
trot off to sheep ranches instead of to Newport?"
"I was broke, Teddy," said Octavia, sweetly, with her interest centred upon
steering safely between a Spanish dagger plant and a clump of chaparral; "I
haven't a thing in the world but this ranch—not even any other home to go to."
"Come, now," said Teddy, anxiously but incredulously, "you don't mean it?"
"When my husband," said Octavia, with a shy slurring of the word, "died three
months ago I thought I had a reasonable amount of the world's goods. His
lawyer exploded that theory in a sixty-minute fully illustrated lecture. I took to
the sheep as a last resort. Do you happen to know of any fashionable caprice
among the gilded youth of Manhattan that induces them to abandon polo and
club windows to become managers of sheep ranches?"
"It's easily explained in my case," responded Teddy, promptly. "I had to go to
work. I couldn't have earned my board in New York, so I chummed a while
with old Sandford, one of the syndicate that owned the ranch before Colonel
Beaupree bought it, and got a place down here. I wasn't manager at first. I
jogged around on ponies and studied the business in detail, until I got all the
points in my head. I saw where it was losing and what the remedies were, and
then Sandford put me in charge. I get a hundred dollars a month, and I earn it."
"Poor Teddy!" said Octavia, with a smile.
"You needn't. I like it. I save half my wages, and I'm as hard as a water plug. It
beats polo."
"Will it furnish bread and tea and jam for another outcast from civilization?"
"The spring shearing," said the manager, "just cleaned up a deficit in last year's
business. Wastefulness and inattention have been the rule heretofore. The
autumn clip will leave a small profit over all expenses. Next year there will be
jam."
When, about four o'clock in the afternoon, the ponies rounded a gentle, brushcovered hill, and then swooped, like a double cream-coloured cyclone, upon
the Rancho de las Sombras, Octavia gave a little cry of delight. A lordly grove

of magnificent live-oaks cast an area of grateful, cool shade, whence the ranch
had drawn its name, "de las Sombras"—of the shadows. The house, of red
brick, one story, ran low and long beneath the trees. Through its middle,
dividing its six rooms in half, extended a broad, arched passageway,
picturesque with flowering cactus and hanging red earthern jars. A "gallery,"
low and broad, encircled the building. Vines climbed about it, and the adjacent
ground was, for a space, covered with transplanted grass and shrubs. A little
lake, long and narrow, glimmered in the sun at the rear. Further away stood the
shacks of the Mexican workers, the corrals, wool sheds and shearing pens. To
the right lay the low hills, splattered with dark patches of chaparral; to the left
the unbounded green prairie blending against the blue heavens.
"It's a home, Teddy," said Octavia, breathlessly; that's what it is—it's a home."
"Not so bad for a sheep ranch," admitted Teddy, with excusable pride. "I've
been tinkering on it at odd times."
A Mexican youth sprang from somewhere in the grass, and took charge of the
creams. The mistress and the manager entered the house.
"Here's Mrs. MacIntyre," said Teddy, as a placid, neat, elderly lady came out
upon the gallery to meet them. "Mrs. Mac, here's the boss. Very likely she will
be wanting a hunk of ham and a dish of beans after her drive."
Mrs. MacIntyre, the housekeeper, as much a fixture on the place as the lake or
the live-oaks, received the imputation of the ranch's resources of refreshment
with mild indignation, and was about to give it utterance when Octavia spoke.
"Oh, Mrs. MacIntyre, don't apologize for Teddy. Yes, I call him Teddy. So
does every one whom he hasn't duped into taking him seriously. You see, we
used to cut paper dolls and play jackstraws together ages ago. No one minds
what he says."
"No," said Teddy, "no one minds what he says, just so he doesn't do it again."
Octavia cast one of those subtle, sidelong glances toward him from beneath
her lowered eyelids—a glance that Teddy used to describe as an upper-cut. But
there was nothing in his ingenuous, weather-tanned face to warrant a suspicion
that he was making an allusion—nothing. Beyond a doubt, thought Octavia, he
had forgotten.
"Mr. Westlake likes his fun," said Mrs. Maclntyre, as she conducted Octavia to
her rooms. "But," she added, loyally, "people around here usually pay
attention to what he says when he talks in earnest. I don't know what would
have become of this place without him."
Two rooms at the east end of the house had been arranged for the occupancy
of the ranch's mistress. When she entered them a slight dismay seized her at
their bare appearance and the scantiness of their furniture; but she quickly

reflected that the climate was a semi-tropical one, and was moved to
appreciation of the well-conceived efforts to conform to it. The sashes had
already been removed from the big windows, and white curtains waved in the
Gulf breeze that streamed through the wide jalousies. The bare floor was
amply strewn with cool rugs; the chairs were inviting, deep, dreamy willows;
the walls were papered with a light, cheerful olive. One whole side of her
sitting room was covered with books on smooth, unpainted pine shelves. She
flew to these at once. Before her was a well-selected library. She caught
glimpses of titles of volumes of fiction and travel not yet seasoned from the
dampness of the press.
Presently, recollecting that she was now in a wilderness given over to mutton,
centipedes and privations, the incongruity of these luxuries struck her, and,
with intuitive feminine suspicion, she began turning to the fly-leaves of
volume after volume. Upon each one was inscribed in fluent characters the
name of Theodore Westlake, Jr.
Octavia, fatigued by her long journey, retired early that night. Lying upon her
white, cool bed, she rested deliciously, but sleep coquetted long with her. She
listened to faint noises whose strangeness kept her faculties on the alert—the
fractious yelping of the coyotes, the ceaseless, low symphony of the wind, the
distant booming of the frogs about the lake, the lamentation of a concertina in
the Mexicans' quarters. There were many conflicting feelings in her heart—
thankfulness and rebellion, peace and disquietude, loneliness and a sense of
protecting care, happiness and an old, haunting pain.
She did what any other woman would have done—sought relief in a
wholesome tide of unreasonable tears, and her last words, murmured to herself
before slumber, capitulating, came softly to woo her, were "He has forgotten."
The manager of the Rancho de las Sombras was no dilettante. He was a
"hustler." He was generally up, mounted, and away of mornings before the rest
of the household were awake, making the rounds of the flocks and camps.
This was the duty of the major-domo, a stately old Mexican with a princely air
and manner, but Teddy seemed to have a great deal of confidence in his own
eyesight. Except in the busy seasons, he nearly always returned to the ranch to
breakfast at eight o'clock, with Octavia and Mrs. Maclntyre, at the little table
set in the central hallway, bringing with him a tonic and breezy cheerfulness
full of the health and flavour of the prairies.
A few days after Octavia's arrival he made her get out one of her riding skirts,
and curtail it to a shortness demanded by the chaparral brakes.
With some misgivings she donned this and the pair of buckskin leggings he
prescribed in addition, and, mounted upon a dancing pony, rode with him to
view her possessions. He showed her everything—the flocks of ewes, muttons

and grazing lambs, the dipping vats, the shearing pens, the uncouth merino
rams in their little pasture, the water-tanks prepared against the summer
drought—giving account of his stewardship with a boyish enthusiasm that
never flagged.
Where was the old Teddy that she knew so well? This side of him was the
same, and it was a side that pleased her; but this was all she ever saw of him
now. Where was his sentimentality—those old, varying moods of impetuous
love-making, of fanciful, quixotic devotion, of heart-breaking gloom, of
alternating, absurd tenderness and haughty dignity? His nature had been a
sensitive one, his temperament bordering closely on the artistic. She knew
that, besides being a follower of fashion and its fads and sports, he had
cultivated tastes of a finer nature. He had written things, he had tampered with
colours, he was something of a student in certain branches of art, and once she
had been admitted to all his aspirations and thoughts. But now—and she could
not avoid the conclusion—Teddy had
barricaded against her every side of himself except one—the side that showed
the manager of the Rancho de las Sombras and a jolly chum who had forgiven
and forgotten. Queerly enough the words of Mr. Bannister's description of her
property came into her mind—"all inclosed within a strong barbed-wire
fence."
"Teddy's fenced, too," said Octavia to herself.
It was not difficult for her to reason out the cause of his fortifications. It had
originated one night at the Hammersmiths' ball. It occurred at a time soon after
she had decided to accept Colonel Beaupree and his million, which was no
more than her looks and the entrée she held to the inner circles were worth.
Teddy had proposed with all his impetuosity and fire, and she looked him
straight in the eyes, an said, coldly and finally: "Never let me hear any such
silly nonsense from you again." "You won't," said Teddy, with an expression
around his mouth, and—now Teddy was inclosed within a strong barbed-wire
fence.
It was on this first ride of inspection that Teddy was seized by the inspiration
that suggested the name of Mother Goose's heroine, and he at once bestowed it
upon Octavia. The idea, supported by both a similarity of names and identity
of occupations, seemed to strike him as a peculiarly happy one, and he never
tired of using it. The Mexicans on the ranch also took up the name, adding
another syllable to accommodate their lingual incapacity for the final "p,"
gravely referring to her as "La Madama Bo-Peepy." Eventually it spread, and
"Madame Bo-Peep's ranch" was as often mentioned as the "Rancho de las
Sombras."
Came the long, hot season from May to September, when work is scarce on

the ranches. Octavia passed the days in a kind of lotus-eater's dream. Books,
hammocks, correspondence with a few intimate friends, a renewed interest in
her old water-colour box and easel—these disposed of the sultry hours of
daylight. The evenings were always sure to bring enjoyment. Best of all were
the rapturous horseback rides with Teddy, when the moon gave light over the
wind-swept leagues, chaperoned by the wheeling night-hawk and the startled
owl. Often the Mexicans would come up from their shacks with their guitars
and sing the weirdest of heart-breaking songs. There were long, cosy chats on
the breezy gallery, and an interminable warfare of wits between Teddy and
Mrs. MacIntyre, whose abundant Scotch shrewdness often more than
overmatched the lighter humour in which she was lacking.
And the nights came, one after another, and were filed away by weeks and
months—nights soft and languorous and fragrant, that should have driven
Strephon to Chloe over wires however barbed, that might have drawn Cupid
himself to hunt, lasso in hand, among those amorous pastures—but Teddy kept
his fences up.
One July night Madame Bo-Peep and her ranch manager were sitting on the
east gallery. Teddy had been exhausting the science of prognostication as to
the probabilities of a price of twenty-four cents for the autumn clip, and had
then subsided into an anesthetic cloud of Havana smoke. Only as incompetent
a judge as a woman would have failed to note long ago that at least a third of
his salary must have gone up in the fumes of those imported Regalias.
"Teddy," said Octavia, suddenly, and rather sharply, "what are you working
down here on a ranch for?"
"One hundred per," said Teddy, glibly, "and found."
"I've a good mind to discharge you."
"Can't do it," said Teddy, with a grin.
"Why not?" demanded Octavia, with argumentative heat.
"Under contract. Terms of sale respect all unexpired contracts. Mine runs until
12 P. M., December thirty-first. You might get up at midnight on that date and
fire me. If you try it sooner I'll be in a position to bring legal proceedings."
Octavia seemed to be considering the prospects of litigation.
"But," continued Teddy cheerfully, "I've been thinking of resigning anyway."
Octavia's rocking-chair ceased its motion. There were centipedes in this
country, she felt sure; and Indians, and vast, lonely, desolate, empty wastes; all
within strong barbed-wire fence. There was a Van Dresser pride, but there was
also a Van Dresser heart. She must know for certain whether or not he had
forgotten.

"Ah, well, Teddy," she said, with a fine assumption of polite interest, "it's
lonely down here; you're longing to get back to the old life—to polo and
lobsters and theatres and balls."
"Never cared much for balls," said Teddy virtuously.
"You're getting old, Teddy. Your memory is failing. Nobody ever knew you to
miss a dance, unless it occurred on the same night with another one which you
attended. And you showed such shocking bad taste, too, in dancing too often
with the same partner. Let me see, what was that Forbes girl's name—the one
with wall eyes—Mabel, wasn't it?"
"No; Adéle. Mabel was the one with the bony elbows. That wasn't wall in
Adéle's eyes. It was soul. We used to talk sonnets together, and Verlaine. Just
then I was trying to run a pipe from the Pierian spring."
"You were on the floor with her," said Octavia, undeflected, "five times at the
Hammersmiths'."
"Hammersmiths' what?" questioned Teddy, vacuously.
"Ball—ball," said Octavia, viciously. "What were we talking of?"
"Eyes, I thought," said Teddy, after some reflection; "and elbows."
"Those Hammersmiths," went on Octavia, in her sweetest society prattle, after
subduing an intense desire to yank a handful of sunburnt, sandy hair from the
head lying back contentedly against the canvas of the steamer chair, "had too
much money. Mines, wasn't it? It was something that paid something to the
ton. You couldn't get a glass of plain water in their house. Everything at that
ball was dreadfully overdone."
"It was," said Teddy.
"Such a crowd there was!" Octavia continued, conscious that she was talking
the rapid drivel of a school-girl describing her first dance. "The balconies were
as warm as the rooms. I—lost—something at that ball." The last sentence was
uttered in a tone calculated to remove the barbs from miles of wire.
"So did I," confessed Teddy, in a lower voice.
"A glove," said Octavia, falling back as the enemy approached her ditches.
"Caste," said Teddy, halting his firing line without loss. "I hobnobbed, half the
evening with one of Hammersmith's miners, a fellow who kept his hands in
his pockets, and talked like an archangel about reduction plants and drifts and
levels and sluice-boxes."
"A pearl-gray glove, nearly new," sighed Octavia, mournfully.
"A bang-up chap, that McArdle," maintained Teddy approvingly. "A man who
hated olives and elevators; a man who handled mountains as croquettes, and

built tunnels in the air; a man who never uttered a word of silly nonsense in his
life. Did you sign those lease-renewal applications yet, madama? They've got
to be on file in the land office by the thirty-first."
Teddy turned his head lazily. Octavia's chair was vacant.
A certain centipede, crawling along the lines marked out by fate, expounded
the situation. It was early one morning while Octavia and Mrs. Maclntyre were
trimming the honeysuckle on the west gallery. Teddy had risen and departed
hastily before daylight in response to word that a flock of ewes had been
scattered from their bedding ground during the night by a thunder-storm.
The centipede, driven by destiny, showed himself on the floor of the gallery,
and then, the screeches of the two women giving him his cue, he scuttled with
all his yellow legs through the open door into the furthermost west room,
which was Teddy's. Arming themselves with domestic utensils selected with
regard to their length, Octavia and Mrs. Maclntyre, with much clutching of
skirts and skirmishing for the position of rear guard in the attacking force,
followed.
Once outside, the centipede seemed to have disappeared, and his prospective
murderers began a thorough but cautious search for their victim.
Even in the midst of such a dangerous and absorbing adventure Octavia was
conscious of an awed curiosity on finding herself in Teddy's sanctum. In that
room he sat alone, silently communing with those secret thoughts that he now
shared with no one, dreamed there whatever dreams he now called on no one
to interpret.
It was the room of a Spartan or a soldier. In one corner stood a wide, canvascovered cot; in another, a small bookcase; in another, a grim stand of
Winchesters and shotguns. An immense table, strewn with letters, papers and
documents and surmounted by a set of pigeon-holes, occupied one side.
The centipede showed genius in concealing himself in such bare quarters. Mrs.
Maclntyre was poking a broom-handle behind the bookcase. Octavia
approached Teddy's cot. The room was just as the manager had left it in his
hurry. The Mexican maid had not yet given it her attention. There was his big
pillow with the imprint of his head still in the centre. She thought the horrid
beast might have climbed the cot and hidden itself to bite Teddy. Centipedes
were thus cruel and vindictive toward managers.
She cautiously overturned the pillow, and then parted her lips to give the
signal for reinforcements at sight of a long, slender, dark object lying there.
But, repressing it in time, she caught up a glove, a pearl-gray glove, flattened
—it might be conceived—by many, many months of nightly pressure beneath
the pillow of the man who had forgotten the Hammersmiths' ball. Teddy must
have left so hurriedly that morning that he had, for once, forgotten to transfer

it to its resting-place by day. Even managers, who are notoriously wily and
cunning, are sometimes caught up with.
Octavia slid the gray glove into the bosom of her summery morning gown. It
was hers. Men who put themselves within a strong barbed-wire fence, and
remember Hammersmith balls only by the talk of miners about sluice-boxes,
should not be allowed to possess such articles.
After all, what a paradise this prairie country was! How it blossomed like the
rose when you found things that were thought to be lost! How delicious was
that morning breeze coming in the windows, fresh and sweet with the breath
of the yellow ratama blooms! Might one not stand, for a minute, with shining,
far-gazing eyes, and dream that mistakes might be corrected?
Why was Mrs. Maclntyre poking about so absurdly with a broom?
"I've found it," said Mrs. MacIntyre, banging the door. "Here it is."
"Did you lose something? asked Octavia, with sweetly polite non-interest.
"The little devil!" said Mrs. Maclntyre, driven to violence. "Ye've no forgotten
him alretty?"
Between them they slew the centipede. Thus was he rewarded for his agency
toward the recovery of things lost at the Hammersmiths' ball.
It seems that Teddy, in due course, remembered the glove, and when he
returned to the house at sunset made a secret but exhaustive search for it. Not
until evening, upon the moonlit eastern gallery, did he find it. It was upon the
hand that he had thought lost to him forever, and so he was moved to repeat
certain nonsense that he had been commanded never, never to utter again.
Teddy's fences were down.
This time there was no ambition to stand in the way, and the wooing was as
natural and successful as should be between ardent shepherd and gentle
shepherdess.
The prairies changed to a garden. The Rancho de las Sombras became the
Ranch of Light.
A few days later Octavia received a letter from Mr. Bannister, in reply to one
she had written to him asking some questions about her business. A portion of
the letter ran as follows:
"I am at a loss to account for your references to the sheep ranch. Two
months after your departure to take up your residence upon it, it was
discovered that Colonel Beaupree's title was worthless. A deed came to light
showing that he disposed of the property before his death. The matter was
reported to your manager, Mr. Westlake, who at once repurchased the property.
It is entirely beyond my powers of conjecture to imagine how you have

remained in ignorance of this fact. I beg that you that will at once confer with
that gentleman, who will, at least, corroborate my statement."
Octavia sought Teddy, with battle in her eye.
"What are you working on this ranch for?" she asked once more.
"One hundred—" he began to repeat, but saw in her face that she knew. She
held Mr. Bannister's letter in her hand. He knew that the game was up.
"It's my ranch," said Teddy, like a schoolboy detected in evil. "It's a mighty
poor manager that isn't able to absorb the boss's business if you give him
time."
"Why were you working down here?" pursued Octavia still struggling after the
key to the riddle of Teddy.
"To tell the truth, 'Tave," said Teddy, with quiet candour, "it wasn't for the
salary. That about kept me in cigars and sunburn lotions. I was sent south by
my doctor. 'Twas that right lung that was going to the bad on account of overexercise and strain at polo and gymnastics. I needed climate and ozone and
rest and things of that sort."
In an instant Octavia was close against the vicinity of the affected organ. Mr.
Bannister's letter fluttered to the floor.
"It's—it's well now, isn't it, Teddy?"
"Sound as a mesquite chunk. I deceived you in one thing. I paid fifty thousand
for your ranch as soon as I found you had no title. I had just about that much
income accumulated at my banker's while I've been herding sheep down here,
so it was almost like picking the thing up on a bargain-counter for a penny.
There's another little surplus of unearned increment piling up there, 'Tave. I've
been thinking of a wedding trip in a yacht with white ribbons tied to the mast,
through the Mediterranean, and then up among the Hebrides and down
Norway to the Zuyder Zee."
"And I was thinking," said Octavia, softly, "of a wedding gallop with my
manager among the flocks of sheep and back to a wedding breakfast with Mrs.
MacIntyre on the gallery, with, maybe, a sprig of orange blossom fastened to
the red jar above the table."
Teddy laughed, and began to chant:
"Little Bo-Peep has lost her sheep,
And doesn't know where to find 'em.
Let 'em alone, and they'll come home,
And—"
Octavia drew his head down, and whispered in his ear, But that is one of the

tales they brought behind them.

Liked This Book?
For More FREE e-Books visit Freeditorial.com


