The Canterville Ghost



When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville
Chase, every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville himself, who
was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his duty to mention the
fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.
"We have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said Lord Canterville,
"since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was frightened into a
fit, from which she never really recovered, by two skeleton hands being placed
on her shoulders as she was dressing for dinner, and I feel bound to tell you,
Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been seen by several living members of my family,
as well as by the rector of the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a
Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the
Duchess, none of our younger servants would stay with us, and Lady
Canterville often got very little sleep at night, in consequence of the
mysterious noises that came from the corridor and the library."
"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I will take the furniture and the ghost
at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, where we have everything
that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows painting the Old
World red, and carrying off your best actors and prima-donnas, I reckon that if
there were such a thing as a ghost in Europe, we'd have it at home in a very
short time in one of our public museums, or on the road as a show."
"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though it may
have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It has been well
known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always makes its appearance
before the death of any member of our family."
"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. But there
is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature are not going to
be suspended for the British aristocracy."
"You are certainly very natural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you don't
mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Only you must remember I warned
you."
**
A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of the
season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase. Mrs. Otis,
who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been a celebrated

New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman, with fine
eyes, and a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving their native land
adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the impression that it is a form
of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had never fallen into this error. She had
a magnificent constitution, and a really wonderful amount of animal spirits.
Indeed, in many respects, she was quite English, and was an excellent example
of the fact that we have really everything in common with America nowadays,
except, of course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his
parents in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a fairhaired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself for
American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for three
successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an excellent
dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses. Otherwise he
was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little girl of fifteen, lithe
and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom in her large blue eyes. She was a
wonderful Amazon, and had once raced old Lord Bilton on her pony twice
round the park, winning by a length and a half, just in front of the Achilles
statue, to the huge delight of the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for
her on the spot, and was sent back to Eton that very night by his guardians, in
floods of tears. After Virginia came the twins, who were usually called "The
Star and Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy Minister, the only true republicans
of the family.
As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and they
started on their drive in high spirits. It was a lovely July evening, and the air
was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now and then they heard a
wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or saw, deep in the rustling
fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant. Little squirrels peered at them from
the beech-trees as they went by, and the rabbits scudded away through the
brushwood and over the mossy knolls, with their white tails in the air. As they
entered the avenue of Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly
overcast with clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a
great flight of rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they reached
the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.
Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed in
black silk, with a white cap and apron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in her former position. She made them each a low curtsey as
they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner, "I bid you welcome
to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed through the fine Tudor hall
into the library, a long, low room, panelled in black oak, at the end of which

was a large stained glass window. Here they found tea laid out for them, and,
after taking off their wraps, they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs.
Umney waited on them.
Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by the
fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said to Mrs.
Umney, "I am afraid something has been spilt there."
"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has been
spilt on that spot."
"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at all care for blood-stains in a
sitting-room. It must be removed at once."
The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice,
"It is the blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on that
very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575. Sir Simon
survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very mysterious
circumstances. His body has never been discovered, but his guilty spirit still
haunts the Chase. The blood-stain has been much admired by tourists and
others, and cannot be removed."
"That is all nonsense," cried Washington Otis; "Pinkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up in no time," and before
the terrified housekeeper could interfere, he had fallen upon his knees, and
was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what looked like a black
cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of the blood-stain could be seen.
"I knew Pinkerton would do it," he exclaimed, triumphantly, as he looked
round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these words than a
terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a fearful peal of thunder
made them all start to their feet, and Mrs. Umney fainted.
"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as he lit
a long cheroot. "I guess the old country is so overpopulated that they have not
enough decent weather for everybody. I have always been of opinion that
emigration is the only thing for England."
"My dear Hiram," cried Mrs. Otis, "what can we do with a woman who
faints?"
"Charge it to her like breakages," answered the Minister; "she won't faint
after that;" and in a few moments Mrs. Umney certainly came to. There was
no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she sternly warned Mr.
Otis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.
"I have seen things with my own eyes, sir," she said, "that would make any
Christian's hair stand on end, and many and many a night I have not closed my

eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here." Mr. Otis, however, and
his wife warmly assured the honest soul that they were not afraid of ghosts,
and, after invoking the blessings of Providence on her new master and
mistress, and making arrangements for an increase of salary, the old
housekeeper tottered off to her own room.

II
The storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred. The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
they found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor. "I don't think it
can be the fault of the Paragon Detergent," said Washington, "for I have tried it
with everything. It must be the ghost." He accordingly rubbed out the stain a
second time, but the second morning it appeared again. The third morning also
it was there, though the library had been locked up at night by Mr. Otis
himself, and the key carried up-stairs. The whole family were now quite
interested; Mr. Otis began to suspect that he had been too dogmatic in his
denial of the existence of ghosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her intention of joining
the Psychical Society, and Washington prepared a long letter to Messrs. Myers
and Podmore on the subject of the Permanence of Sanguineous Stains when
connected with Crime. That night all doubts about the objective existence of
phantasmata were removed for ever.
The day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the
whole family went out to drive. They did not return home till nine o'clock,
when they had a light supper. The conversation in no way turned upon ghosts,
so there were not even those primary conditions of receptive expectations
which so often precede the presentation of psychical phenomena. The subjects
discussed, as I have since learned from Mr. Otis, were merely such as form the
ordinary conversation of cultured Americans of the better class, such as the
immense superiority of Miss Fanny Devonport over Sarah Bernhardt as an
actress; the difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy,
even in the best English houses; the importance of Boston in the development
of the world-soul; the advantages of the baggage-check system in railway
travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent as compared to the
London drawl. No mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was Sir
Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way. At eleven o'clock the family
retired, and by half-past all the lights were out. Some time after, Mr. Otis was
awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside his room. It sounded like
the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming nearer every moment. He got up
at once, struck a match, and looked at the time. It was exactly one o'clock. He

was quite calm, and felt his pulse, which was not at all feverish. The strange
noise still continued, and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsteps. He
put on his slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, and
opened the door. Right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old
man of terrible aspect. His eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair fell
over his shoulders in matted coils; his garments, which were of antique cut,
were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung heavy manacles
and rusty gyves.
"My dear sir," said Mr. Otis, "I really must insist on your oiling those
chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the Tammany
Rising Sun Lubricator. It is said to be completely efficacious upon one
application, and there are several testimonials to that effect on the wrapper
from some of our most eminent native divines. I shall leave it here for you by
the bedroom candles, and will be happy to supply you with more, should you
require it." With these words the United States Minister laid the bottle down
on a marble table, and, closing his door, retired to rest.
For a moment the Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the polished floor, he fled
down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a ghastly green light.
Just, however, as he reached the top of the great oak staircase, a door was
flung open, two little white-robed figures appeared, and a large pillow whizzed
past his head! There was evidently no time to be lost, so, hastily adopting the
Fourth dimension of Space as a means of escape, he vanished through the
wainscoting, and the house became quite quiet.
On reaching a small secret chamber in the left wing, he leaned up against a
moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and realize his position.
Never, in a brilliant and uninterrupted career of three hundred years, had he
been so grossly insulted. He thought of the Dowager Duchess, whom he had
frightened into a fit as she stood before the glass in her lace and diamonds; of
the four housemaids, who had gone into hysterics when he merely grinned at
them through the curtains on one of the spare bedrooms; of the rector of the
parish, whose candle he had blown out as he was coming late one night from
the library, and who had been under the care of Sir William Gull ever since, a
perfect martyr to nervous disorders; and of old Madame de Tremouillac, who,
having wakened up one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an
armchair by the fire reading her diary, had been confined to her bed for six
weeks with an attack of brain fever, and, on her recovery, had become
reconciled to the Church, and broken off her connection with that notorious
sceptic, Monsieur de Voltaire. He remembered the terrible night when the
wicked Lord Canterville was found choking in his dressing-room, with the
knave of diamonds half-way down his throat, and confessed, just before he

died, that he had cheated Charles James Fox out of £50,000 at Crockford's by
means of that very card, and swore that the ghost had made him swallow it.
All his great achievements came back to him again, from the butler who had
shot himself in the pantry because he had seen a green hand tapping at the
window-pane, to the beautiful Lady Stutfield, who was always obliged to wear
a black velvet band round her throat to hide the mark of five fingers burnt
upon her white skin, and who drowned herself at last in the carp-pond at the
end of the King's Walk. With the enthusiastic egotism of the true artist, he
went over his most celebrated performances, and smiled bitterly to himself as
he recalled to mind his last appearance as "Red Reuben, or the Strangled
Babe," his début as "Guant Gibeon, the Blood-sucker of Bexley Moor," and
the furore he had excited one lovely June evening by merely playing ninepins
with his own bones upon the lawn-tennis ground. And after all this some
wretched modern Americans were to come and offer him the Rising Sun
Lubricator, and throw pillows at his head! It was quite unbearable. Besides, no
ghost in history had ever been treated in this manner. Accordingly, he
determined to have vengeance, and remained till daylight in an attitude of
deep thought.

III
The next morning, when the Otis family met at breakfast, they discussed
the ghost at some length. The United States Minister was naturally a little
annoyed to find that his present had not been accepted. "I have no wish," he
said, "to do the ghost any personal injury, and I must say that, considering the
length of time he has been in the house, I don't think it is at all polite to throw
pillows at him,"—a very just remark, at which, I am sorry to say, the twins
burst into shouts of laughter. "Upon the other hand," he continued, "if he really
declines to use the Rising Sun Lubricator, we shall have to take his chains
from him. It would be quite impossible to sleep, with such a noise going on
outside the bedrooms."
For the rest of the week, however, they were undisturbed, the only thing
that excited any attention being the continual renewal of the blood-stain on the
library floor. This certainly was very strange, as the door was always locked at
night by Mr. Otis, and the windows kept closely barred. The chameleon-like
colour, also, of the stain excited a good deal of comment. Some mornings it
was a dull (almost Indian) red, then it would be vermilion, then a rich purple,
and once when they came down for family prayers, according to the simple
rites of the Free American Reformed Episcopalian Church, they found it a
bright emerald-green. These kaleidoscopic changes naturally amused the party

very much, and bets on the subject were freely made every evening. The only
person who did not enter into the joke was little Virginia, who, for some
unexplained reason, was always a good deal distressed at the sight of the
blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morning it was emerald-green.
The second appearance of the ghost was on Sunday night. Shortly after
they had gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in the hall.
Rushing down-stairs, they found that a large suit of old armour had become
detached from its stand, and had fallen on the stone floor, while seated in a
high-backed chair was the Canterville ghost, rubbing his knees with an
expression of acute agony on his face. The twins, having brought their peashooters with them, at once discharged two pellets on him, with that accuracy
of aim which can only be attained by long and careful practice on a writingmaster, while the United States Minister covered him with his revolver, and
called upon him, in accordance with Californian etiquette, to hold up his
hands! The ghost started up with a wild shriek of rage, and swept through
them like a mist, extinguishing Washington Otis's candle as he passed, and so
leaving them all in total darkness. On reaching the top of the staircase he
recovered himself, and determined to give his celebrated peal of demoniac
laughter. This he had on more than one occasion found extremely useful. It
was said to have turned Lord Raker's wig grey in a single night, and had
certainly made three of Lady Canterville's French governesses give warning
before their month was up. He accordingly laughed his most horrible laugh,
till the old vaulted roof rang and rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo
died away when a door opened, and Mrs. Otis came out in a light blue
dressing-gown. "I am afraid you are far from well," she said, "and have
brought you a bottle of Doctor Dobell's tincture. If it is indigestion, you will
find it a most excellent remedy." The ghost glared at her in fury, and began at
once to make preparations for turning himself into a large black dog, an
accomplishment for which he was justly renowned, and to which the family
doctor always attributed the permanent idiocy of Lord Canterville's uncle, the
Hon. Thomas Horton. The sound of approaching footsteps, however, made
him hesitate in his fell purpose, so he contented himself with becoming faintly
phosphorescent, and vanished with a deep churchyard groan, just as the twins
had come up to him.
On reaching his room he entirely broke down, and became a prey to the
most violent agitation. The vulgarity of the twins, and the gross materialism of
Mrs. Otis, were naturally extremely annoying, but what really distressed him
most was that he had been unable to wear the suit of mail. He had hoped that
even modern Americans would be thrilled by the sight of a Spectre in armour,
if for no more sensible reason, at least out of respect for their natural poet
Longfellow, over whose graceful and attractive poetry he himself had whiled
away many a weary hour when the Cantervilles were up in town. Besides it

was his own suit. He had worn it with great success at the Kenilworth
tournament, and had been highly complimented on it by no less a person than
the Virgin Queen herself. Yet when he had put it on, he had been completely
overpowered by the weight of the huge breastplate and steel casque, and had
fallen heavily on the stone pavement, barking both his knees severely, and
bruising the knuckles of his right hand.
For some days after this he was extremely ill, and hardly stirred out of his
room at all, except to keep the blood-stain in proper repair. However, by
taking great care of himself, he recovered, and resolved to make a third
attempt to frighten the United States Minister and his family. He selected
Friday, August 17th, for his appearance, and spent most of that day in looking
over his wardrobe, ultimately deciding in favour of a large slouched hat with a
red feather, a winding-sheet frilled at the wrists and neck, and a rusty dagger.
Towards evening a violent storm of rain came on, and the wind was so high
that all the windows and doors in the old house shook and rattled. In fact, it
was just such weather as he loved. His plan of action was this. He was to make
his way quietly to Washington Otis's room, gibber at him from the foot of the
bed, and stab himself three times in the throat to the sound of low music. He
bore Washington a special grudge, being quite aware that it was he who was in
the habit of removing the famous Canterville blood-stain by means of
Pinkerton's Paragon Detergent. Having reduced the reckless and foolhardy
youth to a condition of abject terror, he was then to proceed to the room
occupied by the United States Minister and his wife, and there to place a
clammy hand on Mrs. Otis's forehead, while he hissed into her trembling
husband's ear the awful secrets of the charnel-house. With regard to little
Virginia, he had not quite made up his mind. She had never insulted him in
any way, and was pretty and gentle. A few hollow groans from the wardrobe,
he thought, would be more than sufficient, or, if that failed to wake her, he
might grabble at the counterpane with palsy-twitching fingers. As for the
twins, he was quite determined to teach them a lesson. The first thing to be
done was, of course, to sit upon their chests, so as to produce the stifling
sensation of nightmare. Then, as their beds were quite close to each other, to
stand between them in the form of a green, icy-cold corpse, till they became
paralyzed with fear, and finally, to throw off the winding-sheet, and crawl
round the room, with white, bleached bones and one rolling eyeball, in the
character of "Dumb Daniel, or the Suicide's Skeleton," a rôle in which he had
on more than one occasion produced a great effect, and which he considered
quite equal to his famous part of "Martin the Maniac, or the Masked Mystery."
**
At half-past ten he heard the family going to bed. For some time he was
disturbed by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, who, with the light-

hearted gaiety of schoolboys, were evidently amusing themselves before they
retired to rest, but at a quarter-past eleven all was still, and, as midnight
sounded, he sallied forth. The owl beat against the window-panes, the raven
croaked from the old yew-tree, and the wind wandered moaning round the
house like a lost soul; but the Otis family slept unconscious of their doom, and
high above the rain and storm he could hear the steady snoring of the Minister
for the United States. He stepped stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil
smile on his cruel, wrinkled mouth, and the moon hid her face in a cloud as he
stole past the great oriel window, where his own arms and those of his
murdered wife were blazoned in azure and gold. On and on he glided, like an
evil shadow, the very darkness seeming to loathe him as he passed. Once he
thought he heard something call, and stopped; but it was only the baying of a
dog from the Red Farm, and he went on, muttering strange sixteenth-century
curses, and ever and anon brandishing the rusty dagger in the midnight air.
Finally he reached the corner of the passage that led to luckless Washington's
room. For a moment he paused there, the wind blowing his long grey locks
about his head, and twisting into grotesque and fantastic folds the nameless
horror of the dead man's shroud. Then the clock struck the quarter, and he felt
the time was come. He chuckled to himself, and turned the corner; but no
sooner had he done so than, with a piteous wail of terror, he fell back, and hid
his blanched face in his long, bony hands. Right in front of him was standing a
horrible spectre, motionless as a carven image, and monstrous as a madman's
dream! Its head was bald and burnished; its face round, and fat, and white; and
hideous laughter seemed to have writhed its features into an eternal grin. From
the eyes streamed rays of scarlet light, the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a
hideous garment, like to his own, swathed with its silent snows the Titan form.
On its breast was a placard with strange writing in antique characters, some
scroll of shame it seemed, some record of wild sins, some awful calendar of
crime, and, with its right hand, it bore aloft a falchion of gleaming steel.
Never having seen a ghost before, he naturally was terribly frightened, and,
after a second hasty glance at the awful phantom, he fled back to his room,
tripping up in his long winding-sheet as he sped down the corridor, and finally
dropping the rusty dagger into the Minister's jack-boots, where it was found in
the morning by the butler. Once in the privacy of his own apartment, he flung
himself down on a small pallet-bed, and hid his face under the clothes. After a
time, however, the brave old Canterville spirit asserted itself, and he
determined to go and speak to the other ghost as soon as it was daylight.
Accordingly, just as the dawn was touching the hills with silver, he returned
towards the spot where he had first laid eyes on the grisly phantom, feeling
that, after all, two ghosts were better than one, and that, by the aid of his new
friend, he might safely grapple with the twins. On reaching the spot, however,
a terrible sight met his gaze. Something had evidently happened to the spectre,

for the light had entirely faded from its hollow eyes, the gleaming falchion had
fallen from its hand, and it was leaning up against the wall in a strained and
uncomfortable attitude. He rushed forward and seized it in his arms, when, to
his horror, the head slipped off and rolled on the floor, the body assumed a
recumbent posture, and he found himself clasping a white dimity bed-curtain,
with a sweeping-brush, a kitchen cleaver, and a hollow turnip lying at his feet!
Unable to understand this curious transformation, he clutched the placard with
feverish haste, and there, in the grey morning light, he read these fearful
words:—
YE OTIS GHOSTE
Ye Onlie True and Originale Spook,
Beware of Ye Imitationes.
All others are counterfeite.
The whole thing flashed across him. He had been tricked, foiled, and outwitted! The old Canterville look came into his eyes; he ground his toothless
gums together; and, raising his withered hands high above his head, swore
according to the picturesque phraseology of the antique school, that, when
Chanticleer had sounded twice his merry horn, deeds of blood would be
wrought, and murder walk abroad with silent feet.
Hardly had he finished this awful oath when, from the red-tiled roof of a
distant homestead, a cock crew. He laughed a long, low, bitter laugh, and
waited. Hour after hour he waited, but the cock, for some strange reason, did
not crow again. Finally, at half-past seven, the arrival of the housemaids made
him give up his fearful vigil, and he stalked back to his room, thinking of his
vain oath and baffled purpose. There he consulted several books of ancient
chivalry, of which he was exceedingly fond, and found that, on every occasion
on which this oath had been used, Chanticleer had always crowed a second
time. "Perdition seize the naughty fowl," he muttered, "I have seen the day
when, with my stout spear, I would have run him through the gorge, and made
him crow for me an 'twere in death!" He then retired to a comfortable lead
coffin, and stayed there till evening.

IV
The next day the ghost was very weak and tired. The terrible excitement of
the last four weeks was beginning to have its effect. His nerves were
completely shattered, and he started at the slightest noise. For five days he
kept his room, and at last made up his mind to give up the point of the blood-

stain on the library floor. If the Otis family did not want it, they clearly did not
deserve it. They were evidently people on a low, material plane of existence,
and quite incapable of appreciating the symbolic value of sensuous
phenomena. The question of phantasmic apparitions, and the development of
astral bodies, was of course quite a different matter, and really not under his
control. It was his solemn duty to appear in the corridor once a week, and to
gibber from the large oriel window on the first and third Wednesdays in every
month, and he did not see how he could honourably escape from his
obligations. It is quite true that his life had been very evil, but, upon the other
hand, he was most conscientious in all things connected with the supernatural.
For the next three Saturdays, accordingly, he traversed the corridor as usual
between midnight and three o'clock, taking every possible precaution against
being either heard or seen. He removed his boots, trod as lightly as possible on
the old worm-eaten boards, wore a large black velvet cloak, and was careful to
use the Rising Sun Lubricator for oiling his chains. I am bound to
acknowledge that it was with a good deal of difficulty that he brought himself
to adopt this last mode of protection. However, one night, while the family
were at dinner, he slipped into Mr. Otis's bedroom and carried off the bottle.
He felt a little humiliated at first, but afterwards was sensible enough to see
that there was a great deal to be said for the invention, and, to a certain degree,
it served his purpose. Still in spite of everything he was not left unmolested.
Strings were continually being stretched across the corridor, over which he
tripped in the dark, and on one occasion, while dressed for the part of "Black
Isaac, or the Huntsman of Hogley Woods," he met with a severe fall, through
treading on a butter-slide, which the twins had constructed from the entrance
of the Tapestry Chamber to the top of the oak staircase. This last insult so
enraged him, that he resolved to make one final effort to assert his dignity and
social position, and determined to visit the insolent young Etonians the next
night in his celebrated character of "Reckless Rupert, or the Headless Earl."
He had not appeared in this disguise for more than seventy years; in fact,
not since he had so frightened pretty Lady Barbara Modish by means of it, that
she suddenly broke off her engagement with the present Lord Canterville's
grandfather, and ran away to Gretna Green with handsome Jack Castletown,
declaring that nothing in the world would induce her to marry into a family
that allowed such a horrible phantom to walk up and down the terrace at
twilight. Poor Jack was afterwards shot in a duel by Lord Canterville on
Wandsworth Common, and Lady Barbara died of a broken heart at Tunbridge
Wells before the year was out, so, in every way, it had been a great success. It
was, however an extremely difficult "make-up," if I may use such a theatrical
expression in connection with one of the greatest mysteries of the
supernatural, or, to employ a more scientific term, the higher-natural world,
and it took him fully three hours to make his preparations. At last everything

was ready, and he was very pleased with his appearance. The big leather
riding-boots that went with the dress were just a little too large for him, and he
could only find one of the two horse-pistols, but, on the whole, he was quite
satisfied, and at a quarter-past one he glided out of the wainscoting and crept
down the corridor. On reaching the room occupied by the twins, which I
should mention was called the Blue Bed Chamber, on account of the colour of
its hangings, he found the door just ajar. Wishing to make an effective
entrance, he flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of water fell right down on
him, wetting him to the skin, and just missing his left shoulder by a couple of
inches. At the same moment he heard stifled shrieks of laughter proceeding
from the four-post bed. The shock to his nervous system was so great that he
fled back to his room as hard as he could go, and the next day he was laid up
with a severe cold. The only thing that at all consoled him in the whole affair
was the fact that he had not brought his head with him, for, had he done so, the
consequences might have been very serious.
He now gave up all hope of ever frightening this rude American family,
and contented himself, as a rule, with creeping about the passages in list
slippers, with a thick red muffler round his throat for fear of draughts, and a
small arquebuse, in case he should be attacked by the twins. The final blow he
received occurred on the 19th of September. He had gone down-stairs to the
great entrance-hall, feeling sure that there, at any rate, he would be quite
unmolested, and was amusing himself by making satirical remarks on the large
Saroni photographs of the United States Minister and his wife which had now
taken the place of the Canterville family pictures. He was simply but neatly
clad in a long shroud, spotted with churchyard mould, had tied up his jaw with
a strip of yellow linen, and carried a small lantern and a sexton's spade. In fact,
he was dressed for the character of "Jonas the Graveless, or the CorpseSnatcher of Chertsey Barn," one of his most remarkable impersonations, and
one which the Cantervilles had every reason to remember, as it was the real
origin of their quarrel with their neighbour, Lord Rufford. It was about a
quarter-past two o'clock in the morning, and, as far as he could ascertain, no
one was stirring. As he was strolling towards the library, however, to see if
there were any traces left of the blood-stain, suddenly there leaped out on him
from a dark corner two figures, who waved their arms wildly above their
heads, and shrieked out "BOO!" in his ear.
Seized with a panic, which, under the circumstances, was only natural, he
rushed for the staircase, but found Washington Otis waiting for him there with
the big garden-syringe, and being thus hemmed in by his enemies on every
side, and driven almost to bay, he vanished into the great iron stove, which,
fortunately for him, was not lit, and had to make his way home through the
flues and chimneys, arriving at his own room in a terrible state of dirt,
disorder, and despair.

After this he was not seen again on any nocturnal expedition. The twins lay
in wait for him on several occasions, and strewed the passages with nutshells
every night to the great annoyance of their parents and the servants, but it was
of no avail. It was quite evident that his feelings were so wounded that he
would not appear. Mr. Otis consequently resumed his great work on the history
of the Democratic Party, on which he had been engaged for some years; Mrs.
Otis organized a wonderful clam-bake, which amazed the whole county; the
boys took to lacrosse euchre, poker, and other American national games, and
Virginia rode about the lanes on her pony, accompanied by the young Duke of
Cheshire, who had come to spend the last week of his holidays at Canterville
Chase. It was generally assumed that the ghost had gone away, and, in fact,
Mr. Otis wrote a letter to that effect to Lord Canterville, who, in reply,
expressed his great pleasure at the news, and sent his best congratulations to
the Minister's worthy wife.
The Otises, however, were deceived, for the ghost was still in the house,
and though now almost an invalid, was by no means ready to let matters rest,
particularly as he heard that among the guests was the young Duke of
Cheshire, whose grand-uncle, Lord Francis Stilton, had once bet a hundred
guineas with Colonel Carbury that he would play dice with the Canterville
ghost, and was found the next morning lying on the floor of the card-room in
such a helpless paralytic state that, though he lived on to a great age, he was
never able to say anything again but "Double Sixes." The story was well
known at the time, though, of course, out of respect to the feelings of the two
noble families, every attempt was made to hush it up, and a full account of all
the circumstances connected with it will be found in the third volume of Lord
Tattle's Recollections of the Prince Regent and his Friends. The ghost, then,
was naturally very anxious to show that he had not lost his influence over the
Stiltons, with whom, indeed, he was distantly connected, his own first cousin
having been married en secondes noces to the Sieur de Bulkeley, from whom,
as every one knows, the Dukes of Cheshire are lineally descended.
Accordingly, he made arrangements for appearing to Virginia's little lover in
his celebrated impersonation of "The Vampire Monk, or the Bloodless
Benedictine," a performance so horrible that when old Lady Startup saw it,
which she did on one fatal New Year's Eve, in the year 1764, she went off into
the most piercing shrieks, which culminated in violent apoplexy, and died in
three days, after disinheriting the Cantervilles, who were her nearest relations,
and leaving all her money to her London apothecary. At the last moment,
however, his terror of the twins prevented his leaving his room, and the little
Duke slept in peace under the great feathered canopy in the Royal
Bedchamber, and dreamed of Virginia.

V
A few days after this, Virginia and her curly-haired cavalier went out riding
on Brockley meadows, where she tore her habit so badly in getting through a
hedge that, on their return home, she made up her mind to go up by the back
staircase so as not to be seen. As she was running past the Tapestry Chamber,
the door of which happened to be open, she fancied she saw some one inside,
and thinking it was her mother's maid, who sometimes used to bring her work
there, looked in to ask her to mend her habit. To her immense surprise,
however, it was the Canterville Ghost himself! He was sitting by the window,
watching the ruined gold of the yellowing trees fly through the air, and the red
leaves dancing madly down the long avenue. His head was leaning on his
hand, and his whole attitude was one of extreme depression. Indeed, so
forlorn, and so much out of repair did he look, that little Virginia, whose first
idea had been to run away and lock herself in her room, was filled with pity,
and determined to try and comfort him. So light was her footfall, and so deep
his melancholy, that he was not aware of her presence till she spoke to him.
"I am so sorry for you," she said, "but my brothers are going back to Eton
to-morrow, and then, if you behave yourself, no one will annoy you."
"It is absurd asking me to behave myself," he answered, looking round in
astonishment at the pretty little girl who had ventured to address him, "quite
absurd. I must rattle my chains, and groan through keyholes, and walk about at
night, if that is what you mean. It is my only reason for existing."
"It is no reason at all for existing, and you know you have been very
wicked. Mrs. Umney told us, the first day we arrived here, that you had killed
your wife."
"Well, I quite admit it," said the Ghost, petulantly, "but it was a purely
family matter, and concerned no one else."
"It is very wrong to kill any one," said Virginia, who at times had a sweet
puritan gravity, caught from some old New England ancestor.
"Oh, I hate the cheap severity of abstract ethics! My wife was very plain,
never had my ruffs properly starched, and knew nothing about cookery. Why,
there was a buck I had shot in Hogley Woods, a magnificent pricket, and do
you know how she had it sent to table? However, it is no matter now, for it is
all over, and I don't think it was very nice of her brothers to starve me to death,
though I did kill her."
"Starve you to death? Oh, Mr. Ghost—I mean Sir Simon, are you hungry?
I have a sandwich in my case. Would you like it?"

"No, thank you, I never eat anything now; but it is very kind of you, all the
same, and you are much nicer than the rest of your horrid, rude, vulgar,
dishonest family."
"Stop!" cried Virginia, stamping her foot, "it is you who are rude, and
horrid, and vulgar, and as for dishonesty, you know you stole the paints out of
my box to try and furbish up that ridiculous blood-stain in the library. First
you took all my reds, including the vermilion, and I couldn't do any more
sunsets, then you took the emerald-green and the chrome-yellow, and finally I
had nothing left but indigo and Chinese white, and could only do moonlight
scenes, which are always depressing to look at, and not at all easy to paint. I
never told on you, though I was very much annoyed, and it was most
ridiculous, the whole thing; for who ever heard of emerald-green blood?"
"Well, really," said the Ghost, rather meekly, "what was I to do? It is a very
difficult thing to get real blood nowadays, and, as your brother began it all
with his Paragon Detergent, I certainly saw no reason why I should not have
your paints. As for colour, that is always a matter of taste: the Cantervilles
have blue blood, for instance, the very bluest in England; but I know you
Americans don't care for things of this kind."
"You know nothing about it, and the best thing you can do is to emigrate
and improve your mind. My father will be only too happy to give you a free
passage, and though there is a heavy duty on spirits of every kind, there will
be no difficulty about the Custom House, as the officers are all Democrats.
Once in New York, you are sure to be a great success. I know lots of people
there who would give a hundred thousand dollars to have a grandfather, and
much more than that to have a family ghost."
"I don't think I should like America."
"I suppose because we have no ruins and no curiosities," said Virginia,
satirically.
"No ruins! no curiosities!" answered the Ghost; "you have your navy and
your manners."
"Good evening; I will go and ask papa to get the twins an extra week's
holiday."
"Please don't go, Miss Virginia," he cried; "I am so lonely and so unhappy,
and I really don't know what to do. I want to go to sleep and I cannot."
"That's quite absurd! You have merely to go to bed and blow out the
candle. It is very difficult sometimes to keep awake, especially at church, but
there is no difficulty at all about sleeping. Why, even babies know how to do
that, and they are not very clever."

"I have not slept for three hundred years," he said sadly, and Virginia's
beautiful blue eyes opened in wonder; "for three hundred years I have not
slept, and I am so tired."
Virginia grew quite grave, and her little lips trembled like rose-leaves. She
came towards him, and kneeling down at his side, looked up into his old
withered face.
"Poor, poor Ghost," she murmured; "have you no place where you can
sleep?"
"Far away beyond the pine-woods," he answered, in a low, dreamy voice,
"there is a little garden. There the grass grows long and deep, there are the
great white stars of the hemlock flower, there the nightingale sings all night
long. All night long he sings, and the cold crystal moon looks down, and the
yew-tree spreads out its giant arms over the sleepers."
Virginia's eyes grew dim with tears, and she hid her face in her hands.
"You mean the Garden of Death," she whispered.
"Yes, death. Death must be so beautiful. To lie in the soft brown earth, with
the grasses waving above one's head, and listen to silence. To have no
yesterday, and no to-morrow. To forget time, to forget life, to be at peace. You
can help me. You can open for me the portals of death's house, for love is
always with you, and love is stronger than death is."
Virginia trembled, a cold shudder ran through her, and for a few moments
there was silence. She felt as if she was in a terrible dream.
Then the ghost spoke again, and his voice sounded like the sighing of the
wind.
"Have you ever read the old prophecy on the library window?"
"Oh, often," cried the little girl, looking up; "I know it quite well. It is
painted in curious black letters, and is difficult to read. There are only six
lines:
"'When a golden girl can win
Prayer from out the lips of sin,
When the barren almond bears,
And a little child gives away its tears,
Then shall all the house be still
And peace come to Canterville.'
But I don't know what they mean."

"They mean," he said, sadly, "that you must weep with me for my sins,
because I have no tears, and pray with me for my soul, because I have no faith,
and then, if you have always been sweet, and good, and gentle, the angel of
death will have mercy on me. You will see fearful shapes in darkness, and
wicked voices will whisper in your ear, but they will not harm you, for against
the purity of a little child the powers of Hell cannot prevail."
Virginia made no answer, and the ghost wrung his hands in wild despair as
he looked down at her bowed golden head. Suddenly she stood up, very pale,
and with a strange light in her eyes. "I am not afraid," she said firmly, "and I
will ask the angel to have mercy on you."
He rose from his seat with a faint cry of joy, and taking her hand bent over
it with old-fashioned grace and kissed it. His fingers were as cold as ice, and
his lips burned like fire, but Virginia did not falter, as he led her across the
dusky room. On the faded green tapestry were broidered little huntsmen. They
blew their tasselled horns and with their tiny hands waved to her to go back.
"Go back! little Virginia," they cried, "go back!" but the ghost clutched her
hand more tightly, and she shut her eyes against them. Horrible animals with
lizard tails and goggle eyes blinked at her from the carven chimneypiece, and
murmured, "Beware! little Virginia, beware! we may never see you again," but
the Ghost glided on more swiftly, and Virginia did not listen. When they
reached the end of the room he stopped, and muttered some words she could
not understand. She opened her eyes, and saw the wall slowly fading away
like a mist, and a great black cavern in front of her. A bitter cold wind swept
round them, and she felt something pulling at her dress. "Quick, quick," cried
the Ghost, "or it will be too late," and in a moment the wainscoting had closed
behind them, and the Tapestry Chamber was empty.

VI
About ten minutes later, the bell rang for tea, and, as Virginia did not come
down, Mrs. Otis sent up one of the footmen to tell her. After a little time he
returned and said that he could not find Miss Virginia anywhere. As she was in
the habit of going out to the garden every evening to get flowers for the
dinner-table, Mrs. Otis was not at all alarmed at first, but when six o'clock
struck, and Virginia did not appear, she became really agitated, and sent the
boys out to look for her, while she herself and Mr. Otis searched every room in
the house. At half-past six the boys came back and said that they could find no
trace of their sister anywhere. They were all now in the greatest state of
excitement, and did not know what to do, when Mr. Otis suddenly

remembered that, some few days before, he had given a band of gipsies
permission to camp in the park. He accordingly at once set off for Blackfell
Hollow, where he knew they were, accompanied by his eldest son and two of
the farm-servants. The little Duke of Cheshire, who was perfectly frantic with
anxiety, begged hard to be allowed to go too, but Mr. Otis would not allow
him, as he was afraid there might be a scuffle. On arriving at the spot,
however, he found that the gipsies had gone, and it was evident that their
departure had been rather sudden, as the fire was still burning, and some plates
were lying on the grass. Having sent off Washington and the two men to scour
the district, he ran home, and despatched telegrams to all the police inspectors
in the county, telling them to look out for a little girl who had been kidnapped
by tramps or gipsies. He then ordered his horse to be brought round, and, after
insisting on his wife and the three boys sitting down to dinner, rode off down
the Ascot road with a groom. He had hardly, however, gone a couple of miles,
when he heard somebody galloping after him, and, looking round, saw the
little Duke coming up on his pony, with his face very flushed, and no hat. "I'm
awfully sorry, Mr. Otis," gasped out the boy, "but I can't eat any dinner as long
as Virginia is lost. Please don't be angry with me; if you had let us be engaged
last year, there would never have been all this trouble. You won't send me
back, will you? I can't go! I won't go!"
The Minister could not help smiling at the handsome young scapegrace,
and was a good deal touched at his devotion to Virginia, so leaning down from
his horse, he patted him kindly on the shoulders, and said, "Well, Cecil, if you
won't go back, I suppose you must come with me, but I must get you a hat at
Ascot."
"Oh, bother my hat! I want Virginia!" cried the little Duke, laughing, and
they galloped on to the railway station. There Mr. Otis inquired of the stationmaster if any one answering to the description of Virginia had been seen on
the platform, but could get no news of her. The station-master, however, wired
up and down the line, and assured him that a strict watch would be kept for
her, and, after having bought a hat for the little Duke from a linen-draper, who
was just putting up his shutters, Mr. Otis rode off to Bexley, a village about
four miles away, which he was told was a well-known haunt of the gipsies, as
there was a large common next to it. Here they roused up the rural policeman,
but could get no information from him, and, after riding all over the common,
they turned their horses' heads homewards, and reached the Chase about
eleven o'clock, dead-tired and almost heart-broken. They found Washington
and the twins waiting for them at the gate-house with lanterns, as the avenue
was very dark. Not the slightest trace of Virginia had been discovered. The
gipsies had been caught on Brockley meadows, but she was not with them,
and they had explained their sudden departure by saying that they had
mistaken the date of Chorton Fair, and had gone off in a hurry for fear they

should be late. Indeed, they had been quite distressed at hearing of Virginia's
disappearance, as they were very grateful to Mr. Otis for having allowed them
to camp in his park, and four of their number had stayed behind to help in the
search. The carp-pond had been dragged, and the whole Chase thoroughly
gone over, but without any result. It was evident that, for that night at any rate,
Virginia was lost to them; and it was in a state of the deepest depression that
Mr. Otis and the boys walked up to the house, the groom following behind
with the two horses and the pony. In the hall they found a group of frightened
servants, and lying on a sofa in the library was poor Mrs. Otis, almost out of
her mind with terror and anxiety, and having her forehead bathed with eau de
cologne by the old housekeeper. Mr. Otis at once insisted on her having
something to eat, and ordered up supper for the whole party. It was a
melancholy meal, as hardly any one spoke, and even the twins were awestruck
and subdued, as they were very fond of their sister. When they had finished,
Mr. Otis, in spite of the entreaties of the little Duke, ordered them all to bed,
saying that nothing more could be done that night, and that he would telegraph
in the morning to Scotland Yard for some detectives to be sent down
immediately. Just as they were passing out of the dining-room, midnight began
to boom from the clock tower, and when the last stroke sounded they heard a
crash and a sudden shrill cry; a dreadful peal of thunder shook the house, a
strain of unearthly music floated through the air, a panel at the top of the
staircase flew back with a loud noise, and out on the landing, looking very
pale and white, with a little casket in her hand, stepped Virginia. In a moment
they had all rushed up to her. Mrs. Otis clasped her passionately in her arms,
the Duke smothered her with violent kisses, and the twins executed a wild
war-dance round the group.
"Good heavens! child, where have you been?" said Mr. Otis, rather angrily,
thinking that she had been playing some foolish trick on them. "Cecil and I
have been riding all over the country looking for you, and your mother has
been frightened to death. You must never play these practical jokes any more."
"Except on the Ghost! except on the Ghost!" shrieked the twins, as they
capered about.
"My own darling, thank God you are found; you must never leave my side
again," murmured Mrs. Otis, as she kissed the trembling child, and smoothed
the tangled gold of her hair.
"Papa," said Virginia, quietly, "I have been with the Ghost. He is dead, and
you must come and see him. He had been very wicked, but he was really sorry
for all that he had done, and he gave me this box of beautiful jewels before he
died."
The whole family gazed at her in mute amazement, but she was quite grave

and serious; and, turning round, she led them through the opening in the
wainscoting down a narrow secret corridor, Washington following with a
lighted candle, which he had caught up from the table. Finally, they came to a
great oak door, studded with rusty nails. When Virginia touched it, it swung
back on its heavy hinges, and they found themselves in a little low room, with
a vaulted ceiling, and one tiny grated window. Imbedded in the wall was a
huge iron ring, and chained to it was a gaunt skeleton, that was stretched out at
full length on the stone floor, and seemed to be trying to grasp with its long
fleshless fingers an old-fashioned trencher and ewer, that were placed just out
of its reach. The jug had evidently been once filled with water, as it was
covered inside with green mould. There was nothing on the trencher but a pile
of dust. Virginia knelt down beside the skeleton, and, folding her little hands
together, began to pray silently, while the rest of the party looked on in wonder
at the terrible tragedy whose secret was now disclosed to them.
"Hallo!" suddenly exclaimed one of the twins, who had been looking out
of the window to try and discover in what wing of the house the room was
situated. "Hallo! the old withered almond-tree has blossomed. I can see the
flowers quite plainly in the moonlight."
"God has forgiven him," said Virginia, gravely, as she rose to her feet, and
a beautiful light seemed to illumine her face.
"What an angel you are!" cried the young Duke, and he put his arm round
her neck, and kissed her.

VII
Four days after these curious incidents, a funeral started from Canterville
Chase at about eleven o'clock at night. The hearse was drawn by eight black
horses, each of which carried on its head a great tuft of nodding ostrichplumes, and the leaden coffin was covered by a rich purple pall, on which was
embroidered in gold the Canterville coat-of-arms. By the side of the hearse
and the coaches walked the servants with lighted torches, and the whole
procession was wonderfully impressive. Lord Canterville was the chief
mourner, having come up specially from Wales to attend the funeral, and sat in
the first carriage along with little Virginia. Then came the United States
Minister and his wife, then Washington and the three boys, and in the last
carriage was Mrs. Umney. It was generally felt that, as she had been frightened
by the ghost for more than fifty years of her life, she had a right to see the last
of him. A deep grave had been dug in the corner of the churchyard, just under
the old yew-tree, and the service was read in the most impressive manner by

the Rev. Augustus Dampier. When the ceremony was over, the servants,
according to an old custom observed in the Canterville family, extinguished
their torches, and, as the coffin was being lowered into the grave, Virginia
stepped forward, and laid on it a large cross made of white and pink almondblossoms. As she did so, the moon came out from behind a cloud, and flooded
with its silent silver the little churchyard, and from a distant copse a
nightingale began to sing. She thought of the ghost's description of the Garden
of Death, her eyes became dim with tears, and she hardly spoke a word during
the drive home.
The next morning, before Lord Canterville went up to town, Mr. Otis had
an interview with him on the subject of the jewels the ghost had given to
Virginia. They were perfectly magnificent, especially a certain ruby necklace
with old Venetian setting, which was really a superb specimen of sixteenthcentury work, and their value was so great that Mr. Otis felt considerable
scruples about allowing his daughter to accept them.
"My lord," he said, "I know that in this country mortmain is held to apply
to trinkets as well as to land, and it is quite clear to me that these jewels are, or
should be, heirlooms in your family. I must beg you, accordingly, to take them
to London with you, and to regard them simply as a portion of your property
which has been restored to you under certain strange conditions. As for my
daughter, she is merely a child, and has as yet, I am glad to say, but little
interest in such appurtenances of idle luxury. I am also informed by Mrs. Otis,
who, I may say, is no mean authority upon Art,—having had the privilege of
spending several winters in Boston when she was a girl,—that these gems are
of great monetary worth, and if offered for sale would fetch a tall price. Under
these circumstances, Lord Canterville, I feel sure that you will recognize how
impossible it would be for me to allow them to remain in the possession of any
member of my family; and, indeed, all such vain gauds and toys, however
suitable or necessary to the dignity of the British aristocracy, would be
completely out of place among those who have been brought up on the severe,
and I believe immortal, principles of Republican simplicity. Perhaps I should
mention that Virginia is very anxious that you should allow her to retain the
box, as a memento of your unfortunate but misguided ancestor. As it is
extremely old, and consequently a good deal out of repair, you may perhaps
think fit to comply with her request. For my own part, I confess I am a good
deal surprised to find a child of mine expressing sympathy with mediævalism
in any form, and can only account for it by the fact that Virginia was born in
one of your London suburbs shortly after Mrs. Otis had returned from a trip to
Athens."
Lord Canterville listened very gravely to the worthy Minister's speech,
pulling his grey moustache now and then to hide an involuntary smile, and

when Mr. Otis had ended, he shook him cordially by the hand, and said: "My
dear sir, your charming little daughter rendered my unlucky ancestor, Sir
Simon, a very important service, and I and my family are much indebted to her
for her marvellous courage and pluck. The jewels are clearly hers, and, egad, I
believe that if I were heartless enough to take them from her, the wicked old
fellow would be out of his grave in a fortnight, leading me the devil of a life.
As for their being heirlooms, nothing is an heirloom that is not so mentioned
in a will or legal document, and the existence of these jewels has been quite
unknown. I assure you I have no more claim on them than your butler, and
when Miss Virginia grows up, I dare say she will be pleased to have pretty
things to wear. Besides, you forget, Mr. Otis, that you took the furniture and
the ghost at a valuation, and anything that belonged to the ghost passed at once
into your possession, as, whatever activity Sir Simon may have shown in the
corridor at night, in point of law he was really dead, and you acquired his
property by purchase."
Mr. Otis was a good deal distressed at Lord Canterville's refusal, and
begged him to reconsider his decision, but the good-natured peer was quite
firm, and finally induced the Minister to allow his daughter to retain the
present the ghost had given her, and when, in the spring of 1890, the young
Duchess of Cheshire was presented at the Queen's first drawing-room on the
occasion of her marriage, her jewels were the universal theme of admiration.
For Virginia received the coronet, which is the reward of all good little
American girls, and was married to her boy-lover as soon as he came of age.
They were both so charming, and they loved each other so much, that every
one was delighted at the match, except the old Marchioness of Dumbleton,
who had tried to catch the Duke for one of her seven unmarried daughters, and
had given no less than three expensive dinner-parties for that purpose, and,
strange to say, Mr. Otis himself. Mr. Otis was extremely fond of the young
Duke personally, but, theoretically, he objected to titles, and, to use his own
words, "was not without apprehension lest, amid the enervating influences of a
pleasure-loving aristocracy, the true principles of Republican simplicity should
be forgotten." His objections, however, were completely overruled, and I
believe that when he walked up the aisle of St. George's, Hanover Square, with
his daughter leaning on his arm, there was not a prouder man in the whole
length and breadth of England.
The Duke and Duchess, after the honeymoon was over, went down to
Canterville Chase, and on the day after their arrival they walked over in the
afternoon to the lonely churchyard by the pine-woods. There had been a great
deal of difficulty at first about the inscription on Sir Simon's tombstone, but
finally it had been decided to engrave on it simply the initials of the old
gentleman's name, and the verse from the library window. The Duchess had
brought with her some lovely roses, which she strewed upon the grave, and

after they had stood by it for some time they strolled into the ruined chancel of
the old abbey. There the Duchess sat down on a fallen pillar, while her
husband lay at her feet smoking a cigarette and looking up at her beautiful
eyes. Suddenly he threw his cigarette away, took hold of her hand, and said to
her, "Virginia, a wife should have no secrets from her husband."
"Dear Cecil! I have no secrets from you."
"Yes, you have," he answered, smiling, "you have never told me what
happened to you when you were locked up with the ghost."
"I have never told any one, Cecil," said Virginia, gravely.
"I know that, but you might tell me."
"Please don't ask me, Cecil, I cannot tell you. Poor Sir Simon! I owe him a
great deal. Yes, don't laugh, Cecil, I really do. He made me see what Life is,
and what Death signifies, and why Love is stronger than both."
The Duke rose and kissed his wife lovingly.
"You can have your secret as long as I have your heart," he murmured.
"You have always had that, Cecil."
"And you will tell our children some day, won't you?"
Virginia blushed.




DE PROFUNDIS
. . . Suffering is one very long moment. We cannot divide it by seasons. We
can only record its moods, and chronicle their return. With us time itself does
not progress. It revolves. It seems to circle round one centre of pain. The
paralysing immobility of a life every circumstance of which is regulated after
an unchangeable pattern, so that we eat and drink and lie down and pray, or
kneel at least for prayer, according to the inflexible laws of an iron formula:
this immobile quality, that makes each dreadful day in the very minutest detail
like its brother, seems to communicate itself to those external forces the very
essence of whose existence is ceaseless change. Of seed-time or harvest, of
the reapers bending over the corn, or the grape gatherers threading through the
vines, of the grass in the orchard made white with broken blossoms or strewn
with fallen fruit: of these we know nothing and can know nothing.
For us there is only one season, the season of sorrow. The very sun and moon
seem taken from us. Outside, the day may be blue and gold, but the light that
creeps down through the thickly-muffled glass of the small iron-barred
window beneath which one sits is grey and niggard. It is always twilight in
one’s cell, as it is always twilight in one’s heart. And in the sphere of thought,

no less than in the sphere of time, motion is no more. The thing that you
personally have long ago forgotten, or can easily forget, is happening to me
now, and will happen to me again to-morrow. Remember this, and you will be
able to understand a little of why I am writing, and in this manner writing. . . .
A week later, I am transferred here. Three more months go over and my
mother dies. No one knew how deeply I loved and honoured her. Her death
was terrible to me; but I, once a lord of language, have no words in which to
express my anguish and my shame. She and my father had bequeathed me a
name they had made noble and honoured, not merely in literature, art,
archaeology, and science, but in the public history of my own country, in its
evolution as a nation. I had disgraced that name eternally. I had made it a low
by-word among low people. I had dragged it through the very mire. I had
given it to brutes that they might make it brutal, and to fools that they might
turn it into a synonym for folly. What I suffered then, and still suffer, is not for
pen to write or paper to record. My wife, always kind and gentle to me, rather
than that I should hear the news from indifferent lips, travelled, ill as she was,
all the way from Genoa to England to break to me herself the tidings of so
irreparable, so irremediable, a loss. Messages of sympathy reached me from
all who had still affection for me. Even people who had not known me
personally, hearing that a new sorrow had broken into my life, wrote to ask
that some expression of their condolence should be conveyed to me. . . .
Three months go over. The calendar of my daily conduct and labour
that
hangs on the outside of my cell door, with my name and sentence written upon
it, tells me that it is May. . . .
Prosperity, pleasure and success, may be rough of grain and common in fibre,
but sorrow is the most sensitive of all created things. There is nothing that
stirs in the whole world of thought to which sorrow does not vibrate in terrible
and exquisite pulsation. The thin beaten-out leaf of tremulous gold that
chronicles the direction of forces the eye cannot see is in comparison coarse. It
is a wound that bleeds when any hand but that of love touches it, and even
then must bleed again, though not in pain.
Where there is sorrow there is holy ground. Some day people will realise
what that means. They will know nothing of life till they do,—and natures
like his can realise it. When I was brought down from my prison to the Court
of Bankruptcy, between two policemen,—waited in the long dreary corridor
that, before the whole crowd, whom an action so sweet and simple hushed into
silence, he might gravely raise his hat to me, as, handcuffed and with bowed
head, I passed him by. Men have gone to heaven for smaller things than that.
It was in this spirit, and with this mode of love, that the saints knelt down to
wash the feet of the poor, or stooped to kiss the leper on the cheek. I have
never said one single word to him about what he did. I do not know to the

present moment whether he is aware that I was even conscious of his action.
It is not a thing for which one can render formal thanks in formal words. I
store it in the treasure-house of my heart. I keep it there as a secret debt that I
am glad to think I can never possibly repay. It is embalmed and kept sweet by
the myrrh and cassia of many tears. When wisdom has been profitless to me,
philosophy barren, and the proverbs and phrases of those who have sought to
give me consolation as dust and ashes in my mouth, the memory of that little,
lovely, silent act of love has unsealed for me all the wells of pity: made the
desert blossom like a rose, and brought me out of the bitterness of lonely exile
into harmony with the wounded, broken, and great heart of the world. When
people are able to understand, not merely how beautiful ---’s action was, but
why it meant so much to me, and always will mean so much, then, perhaps,
they will realise how and in what spirit they should approach me. . . .
The poor are wise, more charitable, more kind, more sensitive than we are. In
their eyes prison is a tragedy in a man’s life, a misfortune, a casuality,
something that calls for sympathy in others. They speak of one who is in
prison as of one who is ‘in trouble’ simply. It is the phrase they always use,
and the expression has the perfect wisdom of love in it. With people of our
own rank it is different. With us, prison makes a man a pariah. I, and such as I
am, have hardly any right to air and sun. Our presence taints the pleasures of
others. We are unwelcome when we reappear. To revisit the glimpses of the
moon is not for us. Our very children are taken away. Those lovely links with
humanity are broken. We are doomed to be solitary, while our sons still live.
We are denied the one thing that might heal us and keep us, that might bring
balm to the bruised heart, and peace to the soul in pain. . . .
I must say to myself that I ruined myself, and that nobody great or small can
be ruined except by his own hand. I am quite ready to say so. I am trying to
say so, though they may not think it at the present moment. This pitiless
indictment I bring without pity against myself. Terrible as was what the world
did to me, what I did to myself was far more terrible still.
I was a man who stood in symbolic relations to the art and culture of my age.
I had realised this for myself at the very dawn of my manhood, and had forced
my age to realise it afterwards. Few men hold such a position in their own
lifetime, and have it so acknowledged. It is usually discerned, if discerned at
all, by the historian, or the critic, long after both the man and his age have
passed away. With me it was different. I felt it myself, and made others feel
it. Byron was a symbolic figure, but his relations were to the passion of his
age and its weariness of passion. Mine were to something more noble, more
permanent, of more vital issue, of larger scope.
The gods had given me almost everything. But I let myself be lured into long
spells of senseless and sensual ease. I amused myself with being aflâneur, a

dandy, a man of fashion. I surrounded myself with the smaller natures and the
meaner minds. I became the spendthrift of my own genius, and to waste an
eternal youth gave me a curious joy. Tired of being on the heights, I
deliberately went to the depths in the search for new sensation. What the
paradox was to me in the sphere of thought, perversity became to me in the
sphere of passion. Desire, at the end, was a malady, or a madness, or both. I
grew careless of the lives of others. I took pleasure where it pleased me, and
passed on. I forgot that every little action of the common day makes or
unmakes character, and that therefore what one has done in the secret chamber
one has some day to cry aloud on the housetop. I ceased to be lord over
myself. I was no longer the captain of my soul, and did not know it. I allowed
pleasure to dominate me. I ended in horrible disgrace. There is only one thing
for me now, absolute humility.
I have lain in prison for nearly two years. Out of my nature has come wild
despair; an abandonment to grief that was piteous even to look at; terrible and
impotent rage; bitterness and scorn; anguish that wept aloud; misery that could
find no voice; sorrow that was dumb. I have passed through every possible
mood of suffering. Better than Wordsworth himself I know what Wordsworth
meant when he said—
‘Suffering is permanent, obscure, and dark
And has the nature of infinity.’
But while there were times when I rejoiced in the idea that my sufferings were
to be endless, I could not bear them to be without meaning. Now I find hidden
somewhere away in my nature something that tells me that nothing in the
whole world is meaningless, and suffering least of all. That something hidden
away in my nature, like a treasure in a field, is Humility.
It is the last thing left in me, and the best: the ultimate discovery at which I
have arrived, the starting-point for a fresh development. It has come to me
right out of myself, so I know that it has come at the proper time. It could not
have come before, nor later. Had any one told me of it, I would have rejected
it. Had it been brought to me, I would have refused it. As I found it, I want to
keep it. I must do so. It is the one thing that has in it the elements of life, of a
new life, Vita Nuova for me. Of all things it is the strangest. One cannot
acquire it, except by surrendering everything that one has. It is only when one
has lost all things, that one knows that one possesses it.
Now I have realised that it is in me, I see quite clearly what I ought to do; in
fact, must do. And when I use such a phrase as that, I need not say that I am
not alluding to any external sanction or command. I admit none. I am far
more of an individualist than I ever was. Nothing seems to me of the smallest
value except what one gets out of oneself. My nature is seeking a fresh mode

of self-realisation. That is all I am concerned with. And the first thing that I
have got to do is to free myself from any possible bitterness of feeling against
the world.
I am completely penniless, and absolutely homeless. Yet there are worse
things in the world than that. I am quite candid when I say that rather than go
out from this prison with bitterness in my heart against the world, I would
gladly and readily beg my bread from door to door. If I got nothing from the
house of the rich I would get something at the house of the poor. Those who
have much are often greedy; those who have little always share. I would not a
bit mind sleeping in the cool grass in summer, and when winter came on
sheltering myself by the warm close-thatched rick, or under the penthouse of a
great barn, provided I had love in my heart. The external things of life seem to
me now of no importance at all. You can see to
what
intensity
of
individualism I have arrived—or am arriving rather, for the journey is long,
and ‘where I walk there are thorns.’
Of course I know that to ask alms on the highway is not to be my lot, and that
if ever I lie in the cool grass at night-time it will be to write sonnets to the
moon. When I go out of prison, R--- will be waiting for me on the other side
of the big iron-studded gate, and he is the symbol, not merely of his own
affection, but of the affection of many others besides. I believe I am to have
enough to live on for about eighteen months at any rate, so that if I may not
write beautiful books, I may at least read beautiful books; and what joy can be
greater? After that, I hope to be able to recreate my creative faculty.
But were things different: had I not a friend left in the world; were there not a
single house open to me in pity; had I to accept the wallet and ragged cloak of
sheer penury: as long as I am free from all resentment, hardness and scorn, I
would be able to face the life with much more calm and confidence than I
would were my body in purple and fine linen, and the soul within me sick with
hate.
And I really shall have no difficulty. When you really want love you will find
it waiting for you.
I need not say that my task does not end there. It would be comparatively easy
if it did. There is much more before me. I have hills far steeper to climb,
valleys much darker to pass through. And I have to get it all out of myself.
Neither religion, morality, nor reason can help me at all.
Morality does not help me. I am a born antinomian. I am one of those who are
made for exceptions, not for laws. But while I see that there is nothing wrong
in what one does, I see that there is something wrong in what one becomes. It
is well to have learned that.
Religion does not help me. The faith that others give to what is unseen, I give

to what one can touch, and look at. My gods dwell in temples made with
hands; and within the circle of actual experience is my creed made perfect and
complete: too complete, it may be, for like many or all of those who have
placed their heaven in this earth, I have found in it not merely the beauty of
heaven, but the horror of hell also. When I think about religion at all, I feel as
if I would like to found an order for those who cannot believe: the
Confraternity of the Faithless, one might call it, where on an altar, on which no
taper burned, a priest, in whose heart peace had no dwelling, might celebrate
with unblessed bread and a chalice empty of wine. Everything to be true must
become a religion. And agnosticism should have its ritual no less than faith.
It has sown its martyrs, it should reap its saints, and praise God daily for
having hidden Himself from man. But whether it be faith or agnosticism, it
must be nothing external to me. Its symbols must be of my own creating.
Only that is spiritual which makes its own form. If I may not find its secret
within myself, I shall never find it: if I have not got it already, it will never
come to me.
Reason does not help me. It tells me that the laws under which I am convicted
are wrong and unjust laws, and the system under which I have suffered a
wrong and unjust system. But, somehow, I have got to make both of these
things just and right to me. And exactly as in Art one is only concerned with
what a particular thing is at a particular moment to oneself, so it is also in the
ethical evolution of one’s character. I have got to make everything that has
happened to me good for me. The plank bed, the loathsome food, the hard
ropes shredded into oakum till one’s finger-tips grow dull with pain, the
menial offices with which each day begins and finishes, the harsh orders that
routine seems to necessitate, the dreadful dress that makes sorrow grotesque to
look at, the silence, the solitude, the shame—each and all of these things I
have to transform into a spiritual experience. There is not a single degradation
of the body which I must not try and make into a spiritualising of the soul.
I want to get to the point when I shall be able to say quite simply, and without
affectation that the two great turning-points in my life were when my father
sent me to Oxford, and when society sent me to prison. I will not say that
prison is the best thing that could have happened to me: for that phrase would
savour of too great bitterness towards myself. I would sooner say, or hear it
said of me, that I was so typical a child of my age, that in my perversity, and
for that perversity’s sake, I turned the good things of my life to evil, and the
evil things of my life to good.
What is said, however, by myself or by others, matters little. The important
thing, the thing that lies before me, the thing that I have to do, if the brief
remainder of my days is not to be maimed, marred, and incomplete, is to
absorb into my nature all that has been done to me, to make it part of me, to

accept it without complaint, fear, or reluctance. The supreme vice is
shallowness. Whatever is realised is right.
When first I was put into prison some people advised me to try and forget who
I was. It was ruinous advice. It is only by realising what I am that I have
found comfort of any kind. Now I am advised by others to try on my release
to forget that I have ever been in a prison at all. I know that would be equally
fatal. It would mean that I would always be haunted by an intolerable sense of
disgrace, and that those things that are meant for me as much as for anybody
else—the beauty of the sun and moon, the pageant of the seasons, the music of
daybreak and the silence of great nights, the rain falling through the leaves, or
the dew creeping over the grass and making it silver—would all be tainted for
me, and lose their healing power, and their power of communicating joy. To
regret one’s own experiences is to arrest one’s own development. To deny
one’s own experiences is to put a lie into the lips of one’s own life. It is no
less than a denial of the soul.
For just as the body absorbs things of all kinds, things common and unclean
no less than those that the priest or a vision has cleansed, and converts them
into swiftness or strength, into the play of beautiful muscles and the moulding
of fair flesh, into the curves and colours of the hair, the lips, the eye; so the
soul in its turn has its nutritive functions also, and can transform into noble
moods of thought and passions of high import what in itself is base, cruel and
degrading; nay, more, may find in these its most august modes of assertion,
and can often reveal itself most perfectly through what was intended to
desecrate or destroy.
The fact of my having been the common prisoner of a common gaol I must
frankly accept, and, curious as it may seem, one of the things I shall have to
teach myself is not to be ashamed of it. I must accept it as a punishment, and
if one is ashamed of having been punished, one might just as well never have
been punished at all. Of course there are many things of which I was
convicted that I had not done, but then there are many things of which I was
convicted that I had done, and a still greater number of things in my life for
which I was never indicted at all. And as the gods are strange, and punish us
for what is good and humane in us as much as for what is evil and perverse, I
must accept the fact that one is punished for the good as well as for the evil
that one does. I have no doubt that it is quite right one should be. It helps one,
or should help one, to realise both, and not to be too conceited about either.
And if I then am not ashamed of my punishment, as I hope not to be, I shall be
able to think, and walk, and live with freedom.
Many men on their release carry their prison about with them into the air, and
hide it as a secret disgrace in their hearts, and at length, like poor poisoned
things, creep into some hole and die. It is wretched that they should have to

do so, and it is wrong, terribly wrong, of society that it should force them to do
so. Society takes upon itself the right to inflict appalling punishment on the
individual, but it also has the supreme vice of shallowness, and fails to realise
what it has done. When the man’s punishment is over, it leaves him to
himself; that is to say, it abandons him at the very moment when its highest
duty towards him begins. It is really ashamed of its own actions, and shuns
those whom it has punished, as people shun a creditor whose debt they cannot
pay, or one on whom they have inflicted an irreparable, an irremediable
wrong. I can claim on my side that if I realise what I have suffered, society
should realise what it has inflicted on me; and that there should be no
bitterness or hate on either side.
Of course I know that from one point of view things will be made different for
me than for others; must indeed, by the very nature of the case, be made so.
The poor thieves and outcasts who are imprisoned here with me are in many
respects more fortunate than I am. The little way in grey city or green field
that saw their sin is small; to find those who know nothing of what they have
done they need go no further than a bird might fly between the twilight and the
dawn; but for me the world is shrivelled to a handsbreadth, and everywhere I
turn my name is written on the rocks in lead. For I have come, not from
obscurity into the momentary notoriety of crime, but from a sort of eternity of
fame to a sort of eternity of infamy, and sometimes seem to myself to have
shown, if indeed it required showing, that between the famous and the
infamous there is but one step, if as much as one.
Still, in the very fact that people will recognise me wherever I go, and know
all about my life, as far as its follies go, I can discern something good for me.
It will force on me the necessity of again asserting myself as an artist, and as
soon as I possibly can. If I can produce only one beautiful work of art I shall
be able to rob malice of its venom, and cowardice of its sneer, and to pluck out
the tongue of scorn by the roots.
And if life be, as it surely is, a problem to me, I am no less a problem to life.
People must adopt some attitude towards me, and so pass judgment, both on
themselves and me. I need not say I am not talking of particular individuals.
The only people I would care to be with now are artists and people who have
suffered: those who know what beauty is, and those who know what sorrow is:
nobody else interests me. Nor am I making any demands on life. In all that I
have said I am simply concerned with my own mental attitude towards life as
a whole; and I feel that not to be ashamed of having been punished is one of
the first points I must attain to, for the sake of my own perfection, and because
I am so imperfect.
Then I must learn how to be happy. Once I knew it, or thought I knew it, by
instinct. It was always springtime once in my heart. My temperament was

akin to joy. I filled my life to the very brim with pleasure, as one might fill a
cup to the very brim with wine. Now I am approaching life from a completely
new standpoint, and even to conceive happiness is often extremely difficult for
me. I remember during my first term at Oxford reading in Pater’s Renaissance
—that book which has had such strange influence over my life—how Dante
places low in the Inferno those who wilfully live in sadness; and going to the
college library and turning to the passage in the Divine Comedy where
beneath the dreary marsh lie those who were ‘sullen in the sweet air,’ saying
for ever and ever through their sighs—
‘Tristi fummo
Nell aer dolce che dal sol s’allegra.’
I knew the church condemned accidia, but the whole idea seemed to me quite
fantastic, just the sort of sin, I fancied, a priest who knew nothing about real
life would invent. Nor could I understand how Dante, who says that ‘sorrow
remarries us to God,’ could have been so harsh to those who were enamoured
of melancholy, if any such there really were. I had no idea that someday this
would become to me one of the greatest temptations of my life.
While I was in Wandsworth prison I longed to die. It was my one desire.
When after two months in the infirmary I was transferred here, and found
myself growing gradually better in physical health, I was filled with rage. I
determined to commit suicide on the very day on which I left prison. After a
time that evil mood passed away, and I made up my mind to live, but to wear
gloom as a king wears purple: never to smile again: to turn whatever house I
entered into a house of mourning: to make my friends walk slowly in sadness
with me: to teach them that melancholy is the true secret of life: to maim them
with an alien sorrow: to mar them with my own pain. Now I feel quite
differently. I see it would be both ungrateful and unkind of me to pull so long
a face that when my friends came to see me they would have to make their
faces still longer in order to show their sympathy; or, if I desired to entertain
them, to invite them to sit down silently to bitter herbs and funeral baked
meats. I must learn how to be cheerful and happy.
The last two occasions on which I was allowed to see my friends here, I tried
to be as cheerful as possible, and to show my cheerfulness, in order to make
them some slight return for their trouble in coming all the way from town to
see me. It is only a slight return, I know, but it is the one, I feel certain, that
pleases them most. I saw R--- for an hour on Saturday week, and I tried to
give the fullest possible expression of the delight I really felt at our meeting.
And that, in the views and ideas I am here shaping for myself, I am quite right
is shown to me by the fact that now for the first time since my imprisonment I
have a real desire for life.

There is before me so much to do, that I would regard it as a terrible tragedy if
I died before I was allowed to complete at any rate a little of it. I see new
developments in art and life, each one of which is a fresh mode of perfection. I
long to live so that I can explore what is no less than a new world to me. Do
you want to know what this new world is? I think you can guess what it is. It
is the world in which I have been living. Sorrow, then, and all that it teaches
one, is my new world.
I used to live entirely for pleasure. I shunned suffering and sorrow of every
kind. I hated both. I resolved to ignore them as far as possible: to treat them,
that is to say, as modes of imperfection. They were not part of my scheme of
life. They had no place in my philosophy. My mother, who knew life as a
whole, used often to quote to me Goethe’s lines—written by Carlyle in a book
he had given her years ago, and translated by him, I fancy, also:—
‘Who never ate his bread in sorrow,
Who never spent the midnight hours
Weeping and waiting for the morrow,—
He knows you not, ye heavenly powers.’
They were the lines which that noble Queen of Prussia, whom Napoleon
treated with such coarse brutality, used to quote in her humiliation and exile;
they were the lines my mother often quoted in the troubles of her later life. I
absolutely declined to accept or admit the enormous truth hidden in them. I
could not understand it. I remember quite well how I used to tell her that I did
not want to eat my bread in sorrow, or to pass any night weeping and watching
for a more bitter dawn.
I had no idea that it was one of the special things that the Fates had in store for
me: that for a whole year of my life, indeed, I was to do little else. But so has
my portion been meted out to me; and during the last few months I have, after
terrible difficulties and struggles, been able to comprehend some of the lessons
hidden in the heart of pain. Clergymen and people who use phrases without
wisdom sometimes talk of suffering as a mystery. It is really a revelation.
One discerns things one never discerned before. One approaches the whole of
history from a different standpoint. What one had felt dimly, through instinct,
about art, is intellectually and emotionally realised with perfect clearness of
vision and absolute intensity of apprehension.
I now see that sorrow, being the supreme emotion of which man is capable, is
at once the type and test of all great art. What the artist is always looking for
is the mode of existence in which soul and body are one and indivisible: in
which the outward is expressive of the inward: in which form reveals. Of such
modes of existence there are not a few: youth and the arts preoccupied with
youth may serve as a model for us at one moment: at another we may like to

think that, in its subtlety and sensitiveness of impression, its suggestion of a
spirit dwelling in external things and making its raiment of earth and air, of
mist and city alike, and in its morbid sympathy of its moods, and tones, and
colours, modern landscape art is realising for us pictorially what was realised
in such plastic perfection by the Greeks. Music, in which all subject is
absorbed in expression and cannot be separated from it, is a complex example,
and a flower or a child a simple example, of what I mean; but sorrow is the
ultimate type both in life and art.
Behind joy and laughter there may be a temperament, coarse, hard and callous.
But behind sorrow there is always sorrow. Pain, unlike pleasure, wears no
mask. Truth in art is not any correspondence between the essential idea and
the accidental existence; it is not the resemblance of shape to shadow, or of the
form mirrored in the crystal to the form itself; it is no echo coming from a
hollow hill, any more than it is a silver well of water in the valley that shows
the moon to the moon and Narcissus to Narcissus. Truth in art is the unity of a
thing with itself: the outward rendered expressive of the inward: the soul made
incarnate: the body instinct with spirit. For this reason there is no truth
comparable to sorrow. There are times when sorrow seems to me to be the
only truth. Other things may be illusions of the eye or the appetite, made to
blind the one and cloy the other, but out of sorrow have the worlds been built,
and at the birth of a child or a star there is pain.
More than this, there is about sorrow an intense, an extraordinary reality. I
have said of myself that I was one who stood in symbolic relations to the art
and culture of my age. There is not a single wretched man in this wretched
place along with me who does not stand in symbolic relation to the very secret
of life. For the secret of life is suffering. It is what is hidden behind
everything. When we begin to live, what is sweet is so sweet to us, and what is
bitter so bitter, that we inevitably direct all our desires towards pleasures, and
seek not merely for a ‘month or twain to feed on honeycomb,’ but for all our
years to taste no other food, ignorant all the while that we may really be
starving the soul.
I remember talking once on this subject to one of the most beautiful
personalities I have ever known: a woman, whose sympathy and noble
kindness to me, both before and since the tragedy of my imprisonment, have
been beyond power and description; one who has really assisted me, though
she does not know it, to bear the burden of my troubles more than anyone else
in the whole world has, and all through the mere fact of her existence, through
her being what she is—partly an ideal and partly an influence: a suggestion of
what one might become as well as a real help towards becoming it; a soul that
renders the common air sweet, and makes what is spiritual seem as simple and
natural as sunlight or the sea: one for whom beauty and sorrow walk hand in

hand, and have the same message. On the occasion of which I am thinking I
recall distinctly how I said to her that there was enough suffering in one
narrow London lane to show that God did not love man, and that wherever
there was any sorrow, though but that of a child, in some little garden weeping
over a fault that it had or had not committed, the whole face of creation was
completely marred. I was entirely wrong. She told me so, but I could not
believe her. I was not in the sphere in which such belief was to be attained to.
Now it seems to me that love of some kind is the only possible explanation of
the extraordinary amount of suffering that there is in the world. I cannot
conceive of any other explanation. I am convinced that there is no other, and
that if the world has indeed, as I have said, been built of sorrow, it has been
built by the hands of love, because in no other way could the soul of man, for
whom the world was made, reach the full stature of its perfection. Pleasure for
the beautiful body, but pain for the beautiful soul.
When I say that I am convinced of these things I speak with too much pride.
Far off, like a perfect pearl, one can see the city of God. It is so wonderful that
it seems as if a child could reach it in a summer’s day. And so a child could.
But with me and such as me it is different. One can realise a thing in a single
moment, but one loses it in the long hours that follow with leaden feet. It is so
difficult to keep ‘heights that the soul is competent to gain.’ We think in
eternity, but we move slowly through time; and how slowly time goes with us
who lie in prison I need not tell again, nor of the weariness and despair that
creep back into one’s cell, and into the cell of one’s heart, with such strange
insistence that one has, as it were, to garnish and sweep one’s house for their
coming, as for an unwelcome guest, or a bitter master, or a slave whose slave
it is one’s chance or choice to be.
And, though at present my friends may find it a hard thing to believe, it is true
none the less, that for them living in freedom and idleness and comfort it is
more easy to learn the lessons of humility than it is for me, who begin the day
by going down on my knees and washing the floor of my cell. For prison life
with its endless privations and restrictions makes one rebellious. The most
terrible thing about it is not that it breaks one’s heart—hearts are made to be
broken—but that it turns one’s heart to stone. One sometimes feels that it is
only with a front of brass and a lip of scorn that one can get through the day at
all. And he who is in a state of rebellion cannot receive grace, to use the
phrase of which the Church is so fond—so rightly fond, I dare say—for in life
as in art the mood of rebellion closes up the channels of the soul, and shuts out
the airs of heaven. Yet I must learn these lessons here, if I am to learn them
anywhere, and must be filled with joy if my feet are on the right road and my
face set towards ‘the gate which is called beautiful,’ though I may fall many
times in the mire and often in the mist go astray.

This New Life, as through my love of Dante I like sometimes to call it, is of
course no new life at all, but simply the continuance, by means of
development, and evolution, of my former life. I remember when I was at
Oxford saying to one of my friends as we were strolling round Magdalen’s
narrow bird-haunted walks one morning in the year before I took my degree,
that I wanted to eat of the fruit of all the trees in the garden of the world, and
that I was going out into the world with that passion in my soul. And so,
indeed, I went out, and so I lived. My only mistake was that I confined myself
so exclusively to the trees of what seemed to me the sun-lit side of the garden,
and shunned the other side for its shadow and its gloom. Failure, disgrace,
poverty, sorrow, despair, suffering, tears even, the broken words that come
from lips in pain, remorse that makes one walk on thorns, conscience that
condemns, self-abasement that punishes, the misery that puts ashes on its
head, the anguish that chooses sack-cloth for its raiment and into its own drink
puts gall:—all these were things of which I was afraid. And as I had
determined to know nothing of them, I was forced to taste each of them in
turn, to feed on them, to have for a season, indeed, no other food at all.
I don’t regret for a single moment having lived for pleasure. I did it to the full,
as one should do everything that one does. There was no pleasure I did not
experience. I threw the pearl of my soul into a cup of wine. I went down the
primrose path to the sound of flutes. I lived on honeycomb. But to have
continued the same life would have been wrong because it would have been
limiting. I had to pass on. The other half of the garden had its secrets for me
also. Of course all this is foreshadowed and prefigured in my books. Some of
it is in The Happy Prince, some of it in The Young King, notably in the
passage where the bishop says to the kneeling boy, ‘Is not He who made
misery wiser than thou art’? a phrase which when I wrote it seemed to me
little more than a phrase; a great deal of it is hidden away in the note of doom
that like a purple thread runs through the texture of Dorian Gray; in The Critic
as Artist it is set forth in many colours; in The Soul of Man it is written down,
and in letters too easy to read; it is one of the refrains whose recurring motifs
make Salome so like a piece of music and bind it together as a ballad; in the
prose poem of the man who from the bronze of the image of the ‘Pleasure that
liveth for a moment’ has to make the image of the ‘Sorrow that abideth for
ever’ it is incarnate. It could not have been otherwise. At every single
moment of one’s life one is what one is going to be no less than what one has
been. Art is a symbol, because man is a symbol.
It is, if I can fully attain to it, the ultimate realisation of the artistic life. For
the artistic life is simply self-development. Humility in the artist is his frank
acceptance of all experiences, just as love in the artist is simply the sense of
beauty that reveals to the world its body and its soul. In Marius the Epicurean
Pater seeks to reconcile the artistic life with the life of religion, in the deep,

sweet, and austere sense of the word. But Marius is little more than a
spectator: an ideal spectator indeed, and one to whom it is given ‘to
contemplate the spectacle of life with appropriate emotions,’ which
Wordsworth defines as the poet’s true aim; yet a spectator merely, and perhaps
a little too much occupied with the comeliness of the benches of the sanctuary
to notice that it is the sanctuary of sorrow that he is gazing at.
I see a far more intimate and immediate connection between the true life of
Christ and the true life of the artist; and I take a keen pleasure in the reflection
that long before sorrow had made my days her own and bound me to her
wheel I had written in The Soul of Man that he who would lead a Christ-like
life must be entirely and absolutely himself, and had taken as my types not
merely the shepherd on the hillside and the prisoner in his cell, but also the
painter to whom the world is a pageant and the poet for whom the world is a
song. I remember saying once to André Gide, as we sat together in some Paris
café, that while meta-physics had but little real interest for me, and morality
absolutely none, there was nothing that either Plato or Christ had said that
could not be transferred immediately into the sphere of Art and there find its
complete fulfilment.
Nor is it merely that we can discern in Christ that close union of personality
with perfection which forms the real distinction between the classical and
romantic movement in life, but the very basis of his nature was the same as
that of the nature of the artist—an intense and flamelike imagination. He
realised in the entire sphere of human relations that imaginative sympathy
which in the sphere of Art is the sole secret of creation. He understood the
leprosy of the leper, the darkness of the blind, the fierce misery of those who
live for pleasure, the strange poverty of the rich. Some one wrote to me in
trouble, ‘When you are not on your pedestal you are not interesting.’ How
remote was the writer from what Matthew Arnold calls ‘the Secret of Jesus.’
Either would have taught him that whatever happens to another happens to
oneself, and if you want an inscription to read at dawn and at night-time, and
for pleasure or for pain, write up on the walls of your house in letters for the
sun to gild and the moon to silver, ‘Whatever happens to oneself happens to
another.’
Christ’s place indeed is with the poets. His whole conception of Humanity
sprang right out of the imagination and can only be realised by it. What God
was to the pantheist, man was to Him. He was the first to conceive the divided
races as a unity. Before his time there had been gods and men, and, feeling
through the mysticism of sympathy that in himself each had been made
incarnate, he calls himself the Son of the one or the Son of the other, according
to his mood. More than any one else in history he wakes in us that temper of
wonder to which romance always appeals. There is still something to me

almost incredible in the idea of a young Galilean peasant imagining that he
could bear on his own shoulders the burden of the entire world; all that had
already been done and suffered, and all that was yet to be done and suffered:
the sins of Nero, of Caesar Borgia, of Alexander VI., and of him who was
Emperor of Rome and Priest of the Sun: the sufferings of those whose names
are legion and whose dwelling is among the tombs: oppressed nationalities,
factory children, thieves, people in prison, outcasts, those who are dumb under
oppression and whose silence is heard only of God; and not merely imagining
this but actually achieving it, so that at the present moment all who come in
contact with his personality, even though they may neither bow to his altar nor
kneel before his priest, in some way find that the ugliness of their sin is taken
away and the beauty of their sorrow revealed to them.
I had said of Christ that he ranks with the poets. That is true. Shelley and
Sophocles are of his company. But his entire life also is the most wonderful of
poems. For ‘pity and terror’ there is nothing in the entire cycle of Greek
tragedy to touch it. The absolute purity of the protagonist raises the entire
scheme to a height of romantic art from which the sufferings of Thebes and
Pelops’ line are by their very horror excluded, and shows how wrong Aristotle
was when he said in his treatise on the drama that it would be impossible to
bear the spectacle of one blameless in pain. Nor in Æschylus nor Dante, those
stern masters of tenderness, in Shakespeare, the most purely human of all the
great artists, in the whole of Celtic myth and legend, where the loveliness of
the world is shown through a mist of tears, and the life of a man is no more
than the life of a flower, is there anything that, for sheer simplicity of pathos
wedded and made one with sublimity of tragic effect, can be said to equal or
even approach the last act of Christ’s passion. The little supper with his
companions, one of whom has already sold him for a price; the anguish in the
quiet moon-lit garden; the false friend coming close to him so as to betray him
with a kiss; the friend who still believed in him, and on whom as on a rock he
had hoped to build a house of refuge for Man, denying him as the bird cried to
the dawn; his own utter loneliness, his submission, his acceptance of
everything; and along with it all such scenes as the high priest of orthodoxy
rending his raiment in wrath, and the magistrate of civil justice calling for
water in the vain hope of cleansing himself of that stain of innocent blood that
makes him the scarlet figure of history; the coronation ceremony of sorrow,
one of the most wonderful things in the whole of recorded time; the
crucifixion of the Innocent One before the eyes of his mother and of the
disciple whom he loved; the soldiers gambling and throwing dice for his
clothes; the terrible death by which he gave the world its most eternal symbol;
and his final burial in the tomb of the rich man, his body swathed in Egyptian
linen with costly spices and perfumes as though he had been a king’s son.
When one contemplates all this from the point of view of art alone one cannot

but be grateful that the supreme office of the Church should be the playing of
the tragedy without the shedding of blood: the mystical presentation, by means
of dialogue and costume and gesture even, of the Passion of her Lord; and it is
always a source of pleasure and awe to me to remember that the ultimate
survival of the Greek chorus, lost elsewhere to art, is to be found in the
servitor answering the priest at Mass.
Yet the whole life of Christ—so entirely may sorrow and beauty be made one
in their meaning and manifestation—is really an idyll, though it ends with the
veil of the temple being rent, and the darkness coming over the face of the
earth, and the stone rolled to the door of the sepulchre. One always thinks of
him as a young bridegroom with his companions, as indeed he somewhere
describes himself; as a shepherd straying through a valley with his sheep in
search of green meadow or cool stream; as a singer trying to build out of the
music the walls of the City of God; or as a lover for whose love the whole
world was too small. His miracles seem to me to be as exquisite as the
coming of spring, and quite as natural. I see no difficulty at all in believing
that such was the charm of his personality that his mere presence could bring
peace to souls in anguish, and that those who touched his garments or his
hands forgot their pain; or that as he passed by on the highway of life people
who had seen nothing of life’s mystery, saw it clearly, and others who had
been deaf to every voice but that of pleasure heard for the first time the voice
of love and found it as ‘musical as Apollo’s lute’; or that evil passions fled at
his approach, and men whose dull unimaginative lives had been but a mode of
death rose as it were from the grave when he called them; or that when he
taught on the hillside the multitude forgot their hunger and thirst and the cares
of this world, and that to his friends who listened to him as he sat at meat the
coarse food seemed delicate, and the water had the taste of good wine, and the
whole house became full of the odour and sweetness of nard.
Renan in his Vie de Jesus—that gracious fifth gospel, the gospel according to
St. Thomas, one might call it—says somewhere that Christ’s great
achievement was that he made himself as much loved after his death as he had
been during his lifetime. And certainly, if his place is among the poets, he is
the leader of all the lovers. He saw that love was the first secret of the world
for which the wise men had been looking, and that it was only through
love
that one could approach either the heart of the leper or the feet of God.
And above all, Christ is the most supreme of individualists. Humility, like the
artistic, acceptance of all experiences, is merely a mode of manifestation. It is
man’s soul that Christ is always looking for. He calls it ‘God’s Kingdom,’ and
finds it in every one. He compares it to little things, to a tiny seed, to a
handful of leaven, to a pearl. That is because one realises one’s soul only by
getting rid of all alien passions, all acquired culture, and all external

possessions, be they good or evil.
I bore up against everything with some stubbornness of will and much
rebellion of nature, till I had absolutely nothing left in the world but one thing.
I had lost my name, my position, my happiness, my freedom, my wealth. I was
a prisoner and a pauper. But I still had my children left. Suddenly they were
taken away from me by the law. It was a blow so appalling that I did not know
what to do, so I flung myself on my knees, and bowed my head, and wept, and
said, ‘The body of a child is as the body of the Lord: I am not worthy of
either.’ That moment seemed to save me. I saw then that the only thing for me
was to accept everything. Since then—curious as it will no doubt sound—I
have been happier. It was of course my soul in its ultimate essence that I had
reached. In many ways I had been its enemy, but I found it waiting for me as a
friend. When one comes in contact with the soul it makes one simple as a
child, as Christ said one should be.
It is tragic how few people ever ‘possess their souls’ before they die. ‘Nothing
is more rare in any man,’ says Emerson, ‘than an act of his own.’ It is quite
true. Most people are other people. Their thoughts are some
one else’s
opinions, their lives a mimicry, their passions a quotation. Christ was not
merely the supreme individualist, but he was the first individualist in history.
People have tried to make him out an ordinary philanthropist, or ranked him as
an altruist with the scientific and sentimental. But he was really neither one
nor the other. Pity he has, of course, for the poor, for those who are shut up in
prisons, for the lowly, for the wretched; but he has far more pity for the rich,
for the hard hedonists, for those who waste their freedom in becoming slaves
to things, for those who wear soft raiment and live in kings’ houses. Riches
and pleasure seemed to him to be really greater tragedies than poverty or
sorrow. And as for altruism, who knew better than he that it is vocation not
volition that determines us, and that one cannot gather grapes of thorns or figs
from thistles?
To live for others as a definite self-conscious aim was not his creed. It was not
the basis of his creed. When he says, ‘Forgive your enemies,’ it is not for the
sake of the enemy, but for one’s own sake that he says so, and because love is
more beautiful than hate. In his own entreaty to the young man, ‘Sell all that
thou hast and give to the poor,’ it is not of the state of the poor that he is
thinking but of the soul of the young man, the soul that wealth was marring. In
his view of life he is one with the artist who knows that by the inevitable law
of self-perfection, the poet must sing, and the sculptor think in bronze, and the
painter make the world a mirror for his moods, as surely and as certainly as the
hawthorn must blossom in spring, and the corn turn to gold at harvest-time,
and the moon in her ordered wanderings change from shield to sickle, and
from sickle to shield.

But while Christ did not say to men, ‘Live for others,’ he pointed out that there
was no difference at all between the lives of others and one’s own life. By this
means he gave to man an extended, a Titan personality. Since his coming the
history of each separate individual is, or can be made, the history of the world.
Of course, culture has intensified the personality of man. Art has made us
myriad-minded. Those who have the artistic temperament go into exile with
Dante and learn how salt is the bread of others, and how steep their stairs; they
catch for a moment the serenity and calm of Goethe, and yet know but too
well that Baudelaire cried to God—
‘O Seigneur, donnez moi la force et le courage
De contempler mon corps et mon coeur sans dégoût.’
Out of Shakespeare’s sonnets they draw, to their own hurt it may be, the secret
of his love and make it their own; they look with new eyes on modern life,
because they have listened to one of Chopin’s nocturnes, or handled Greek
things, or read the story of the passion of some dead man for some dead
woman whose hair was like threads of fine gold, and whose mouth was as a
pomegranate. But the sympathy of the artistic temperament is necessarily with
what has found expression. In words or in colours, in music or in marble,
behind the painted masks of an Æschylean play, or through some Sicilian
shepherds’ pierced and jointed reeds, the man and his message must have been
revealed.
To the artist, expression is the only mode under which he can conceive life at
all. To him what is dumb is dead. But to Christ it was not so. With a width
and wonder of imagination that fills one almost with awe, he took the entire
world of the inarticulate, the voiceless world of pain, as his kingdom, and
made of himself its eternal mouthpiece. Those of whom I have spoken, who
are dumb under oppression, and ‘whose silence is heard only of God,’ he
chose as his brothers. He sought to become eyes to the blind, ears to the deaf,
and a cry in the lips of those whose tongues had been tied. His desire was to
be to the myriads who had found no utterance a very trumpet through which
they might call to heaven. And feeling, with the artistic nature of one to
whom suffering and sorrow were modes through which he could realise
his
conception of the beautiful, that an idea is of no value till it becomes incarnate
and is made an image, he made of himself the image of the Man of Sorrows,
and as such has fascinated and dominated art as no Greek god ever succeeded
in doing.
For the Greek gods, in spite of the white and red of their fair fleet limbs, were
not really what they appeared to be. The curved brow of Apollo was like the
sun’s disc crescent over a hill at dawn, and his feet were as the wings of the
morning, but he himself had been cruel to Marsyas and had made Niobe
childless. In the steel shields of Athena’s eyes there had been no pity for

Arachne; the pomp and peacocks of Hera were all that was really noble about
her; and the Father of the Gods himself had been too fond of the daughters of
men. The two most deeply suggestive figures of Greek Mythology were, for
religion, Demeter, an Earth Goddess, not one of the Olympians, and for art,
Dionysus, the son of a mortal woman to whom the moment of his birth had
proved also the moment of her death.
But Life itself from its lowliest and most humble sphere produced one far
more marvellous than the mother of Proserpina or the son of Semele. Out of
the Carpenter’s shop at Nazareth had come a personality infinitely greater than
any made by myth and legend, and one, strangely enough, destined to reveal to
the world the mystical meaning of wine and the real beauties of the lilies of
the field as none, either on Cithaeron or at Enna, had ever done.
The song of Isaiah, ‘He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him,’ had seemed
to him to prefigure himself, and in him the prophecy was fulfilled. We must
not be afraid of such a phrase. Every single work of art is the fulfilment of a
prophecy: for every work of art is the conversion of an idea into an image.
Every single human being should be the fulfilment of a prophecy: for every
human being should be the realisation of some ideal, either in the mind of God
or in the mind of man. Christ found the type and fixed it, and the dream of a
Virgilian poet, either at Jerusalem or at Babylon, became in the long progress
of the centuries incarnate in him for whom the world was waiting.
To me one of the things in history the most to be regretted is that the Christ’s
own renaissance, which has produced the Cathedral at Chartres, the Arthurian
cycle of legends, the life of St. Francis of Assisi, the art of Giotto, and Dante’s
Divine Comedy, was not allowed to develop on its own lines, but was
interrupted and spoiled by the dreary classical Renaissance that gave us
Petrarch, and Raphael’s frescoes, and Palladian architecture, and formal
French tragedy, and St. Paul’s Cathedral, and Pope’s poetry, and everything
that is made from without and by dead rules, and does not spring from within
through some spirit informing it. But wherever there is a romantic movement
in art there somehow, and under some form, is Christ, or the soul of Christ.
He is in Romeo and Juliet, in the Winter’s Tale, in Provençal poetry, in the
Ancient Mariner, in La Belle Dame sans merci, and in Chatterton’s Ballad of
Charity.
We owe to him the most diverse things and people. Hugo’s Les Misérables,
Baudelaire’s Fleurs du Mal, the note of pity in Russian novels, Verlaine and
Verlaine’s poems, the stained glass and tapestries and the quattro-cento work
of Burne-Jones and Morris, belong to him no less than the tower of Giotto,
Lancelot and Guinevere, Tannhäuser, the troubled romantic marbles of
Michael Angelo, pointed architecture, and the love of children and flowers—

for both of which, indeed, in classical art there was but little place, hardly
enough for them to grow or play in, but which, from the twelfth century down
to our own day, have been continually making their appearances in art, under
various modes and at various times, coming fitfully and wilfully, as children,
as flowers, are apt to do: spring always seeming to one as if the flowers had
been in hiding, and only came out into the sun because they were afraid that
grown up people would grow tired of looking for them and give up the search;
and the life of a child being no more than an April day on which there is both
rain and sun for the narcissus.
It is the imaginative quality of Christ’s own nature that makes him this
palpitating centre of romance. The strange figures of poetic drama and ballad
are made by the imagination of others, but out of his own imagination entirely
did Jesus of Nazareth create himself. The cry of Isaiah had really no more to
do with his coming than the song of the nightingale has to do with the rising of
the moon—no more, though perhaps no less. He was the denial as well as the
affirmation of prophecy. For every expectation that he fulfilled there was
another that he destroyed. ‘In all beauty,’ says Bacon, ‘there is some
strangeness of proportion,’ and of those who are born of the spirit—of those,
that is to say, who like himself are dynamic forces—Christ says that they are
like the wind that ‘bloweth where it listeth, and no man can tell whence it
cometh and whither it goeth.’ That is why he is so fascinating to artists. He
has all the colour elements of life: mystery, strangeness, pathos, suggestion,
ecstasy, love. He appeals to the temper of wonder, and creates that mood in
which alone he can be understood.
And to me it is a joy to remember that if he is ‘of imagination all compact,’ the
world itself is of the same substance. I said in Dorian Gray that the great sins
of the world take place in the brain: but it is in the brain that everything takes
place. We know now that we do not see with the eyes or hear with the ears.
They are really channels for the transmission, adequate or inadequate, of sense
impressions. It is in the brain that the poppy is red, that the apple is odorous,
that the skylark sings.
Of late I have been studying with diligence the four prose poems about Christ.
At Christmas I managed to get hold of a Greek Testament, and every morning,
after I had cleaned my cell and polished my tins, I read a little of the Gospels,
a dozen verses taken by chance anywhere. It is a delightful way of opening
the day. Everyone, even in a turbulent, ill-disciplined life, should do the same.
Endless repetition, in and out of season, has spoiled for us the freshness, the
naïveté, the simple romantic charm of the Gospels. We hear them read far too
often and far too badly, and all repetition is anti-spiritual. When one returns to
the Greek; it is like going into a garden of lilies out of some, narrow and dark
house.

And to me, the pleasure is doubled by the reflection that it is extremely
probable that we have the actual terms, the ipsissima verba, used by Christ. It
was always supposed that Christ talked in Aramaic. Even Renan thought so.
But now we know that the Galilean peasants, like the Irish peasants of our
own day, were bilingual, and that Greek was the ordinary language of
intercourse all over Palestine, as indeed all over the Eastern world. I never
liked the idea that we knew of Christ’s own words only through a translation
of a translation. It is a delight to me to think that as far as his conversation
was concerned, Charmides might have listened to him, and Socrates reasoned
with him, and Plato understood him: that he really said that when he thought of the lilies of the field and how they neither toil
nor spin, his absolute expression was and that his last word when he cried out ‘my life
has been completed, has reached its fulfilment, has been perfected,’ was
exactly as St. John tells us it was: no more.
While in reading the Gospels—particularly that of St. John himself, or
whatever early Gnostic took his name and mantle—I see the continual
assertion of the imagination as the basis of all spiritual and material life, I see
also that to Christ imagination was simply a form of love, and that to him love
was lord in the fullest meaning of the phrase. Some six weeks ago I was
allowed by the doctor to have white bread to eat instead of the coarse black or
brown bread of ordinary prison fare. It is a great delicacy. It will sound
strange that dry bread could possibly be a delicacy to any one. To me it is so
much so that at the close of each meal I carefully eat whatever crumbs may be
left on my tin plate, or have fallen on the rough towel that one uses as a cloth
so as not to soil one’s table; and I do so not from hunger—I get now quite
sufficient food—but simply in order that nothing should be wasted of what is
given to me. So one should look on love.
Christ, like all fascinating personalities, had the power of not merely saying
beautiful things himself, but of making other people say beautiful things to
him; and I love the story St. Mark tells us about the Greek woman, who, when
as a trial of her faith he said to her that he could not give her the bread of the
children of Israel, answered him that the little dogs—(‘little dogs’ it
should be rendered)—who are under the table eat of the crumbs that the
children let fall. Most people live for love and admiration. But it is by love
and admiration that we should live. If any love is shown us we should
recognise that we are quite unworthy of it. Nobody is worthy to be loved.
The fact that God loves man shows us that in the divine order of ideal things it
is written that eternal love is to be given to what is eternally unworthy. Or if
that phrase seems to be a bitter one to bear, let us say that every one is worthy
of love, except him who thinks that he is. Love is a sacrament that should be
taken kneeling, and Domine, non sum dignus should be on the lips and in the

hearts of those who receive it.
If ever I write again, in the sense of producing artistic work, there are just two
subjects on which and through which I desire to express myself: one is ‘Christ
as the precursor of the romantic movement in life’: the other is ‘The artistic
life considered in its relation to conduct.’ The first is, of course, intensely
fascinating, for I see in Christ not merely the essentials of the supreme
romantic type, but all the accidents, the wilfulnesses even, of the romantic
temperament also. He was the first person who ever said to people that they
should live ‘flower-like lives.’ He fixed the phrase. He took children as the
type of what people should try to become. He held them up as examples to
their elders, which I myself have always thought the chief use of children, if
what is perfect should have a use. Dante describes the soul of a man as
coming from the hand of God ‘weeping and laughing like a little child,’ and
Christ also saw that the soul of each one should be a guisa di fanciulla che
piangendo e ridendo pargoleggia. He felt that life was changeful, fluid, active,
and that to allow it to be stereotyped into any form was death. He saw that
people should not be too serious over material, common interests: that to be
unpractical was to be a great thing: that one should not bother too much over
affairs. The birds didn’t, why should man? He is charming when he says,
‘Take no thought for the morrow; is not the soul more than meat? is not the
body more than raiment?’ A Greek might have used the latter phrase. It is full
of Greek feeling. But only Christ could have said both, and so summed up life
perfectly for us.
His morality is all sympathy, just what morality should be. If the only thing
that he ever said had been, ‘Her sins are forgiven her because she loved much,’
it would have been worth while dying to have said it. His justice is all poetical
justice, exactly what justice should be. The beggar goes to heaven because he
has been unhappy. I cannot conceive a better reason for his being sent there.
The people who work for an hour in the vineyard in the cool of the evening
receive just as much reward as those who have toiled there all day long in the
hot sun. Why shouldn’t they? Probably no one deserved anything. Or
perhaps they were a different kind of people. Christ had no patience with the
dull lifeless mechanical systems that treat people as if they were things, and so
treat everybody alike: for him there were no laws: there were exceptions
merely, as if anybody, or anything, for that matter, was like aught else in the
world!
That which is the very keynote of romantic art was to him the proper basis of
natural life. He saw no other basis. And when they brought him one, taken in
the very act of sin and showed him her sentence written in the law, and asked
him what was to be done, he wrote with his finger on the ground as though he
did not hear them, and finally, when they pressed him again, looked up and

said, ‘Let him of you who has never sinned be the first to throw the stone at
her.’ It was worthwhile living to have said that.
Like all poetical natures he loved ignorant people. He knew that in the soul of
one who is ignorant there is always room for a great idea. But he could not
stand stupid people, especially those who are made stupid by education:
people who are full of opinions not one of which they even understand, a
peculiarly modern type, summed up by Christ when he describes it as the type
of one who has the key of knowledge, cannot use it himself, and does not
allow other people to use it, though it may be made to open the gate of God’s
Kingdom. His chief war was against the Philistines. That is the war every
child of light has to wage. Philistinism was the note of the age and community
in which he lived. In their heavy inaccessibility to ideas, their dull
respectability, their tedious orthodoxy, their worship of vulgar success, their
entire preoccupation with the gross materialistic side of life, and their
ridiculous estimate of themselves and their importance, the Jews of Jerusalem
in Christ’s day were the exact counterpart of the British Philistine of our own.
Christ mocked at the ‘whited sepulchre’ of respectability, and fixed that phrase
for ever. He treated worldly success as a thing absolutely to be despised. He
saw nothing in it at all. He looked on wealth as an encumbrance to a man. He
would not hear of life being sacrificed to any system of thought or morals. He
pointed out that forms and ceremonies were made for man, not man for forms
and ceremonies. He took sabbatarianism as a type of the things that should be
set at nought. The cold philanthropies, the ostentatious public charities, the
tedious formalisms so dear to the middle-class mind, he exposed with utter
and relentless scorn. To us, what is termed orthodoxy is merely a facile
unintelligent acquiescence; but to them, and in their hands, it was a terrible
and paralysing tyranny. Christ swept it aside. He showed that the spirit alone
was of value. He took a keen pleasure in pointing out to them that though they
were always reading the law and the prophets, they had not really the smallest
idea of what either of them meant. In opposition to their tithing of each
separate day into the fixed routine of prescribed duties, as they tithe mint and
rue, he preached the enormous importance of living completely for the
moment.
Those whom he saved from their sins are saved simply for beautiful moments
in their lives. Mary Magdalen, when she sees Christ, breaks the rich vase of
alabaster that one of her seven lovers had given her, and spills the odorous
spices over his tired dusty feet, and for that one moment’s sake sits for ever
with Ruth and Beatrice in the tresses of the snow-white rose of Paradise. All
that Christ says to us by the way of a little warning is that every moment
should be beautiful, that the soul should always be ready for the coming of the
bridegroom, always waiting for the voice of the lover, Philistinism being
simply that side of man’s nature that is not illumined by the imagination. He

sees all the lovely influences of life as modes of light: the imagination itself is
the world of light. The world is made by it, and yet the world cannot
understand it: that is because the imagination is simply a manifestation of
love, and it is love and the capacity for it that distinguishes one human being
from another.
But it is when he deals with a sinner that Christ is most romantic, in the sense
of most real. The world had always loved the saint as being the nearest
possible approach to the perfection of God. Christ, through some divine
instinct in him, seems to have always loved the sinner as being the nearest
possible approach to the perfection of man. His primary desire was not to
reform people, any more than his primary desire was to a relieve suffering. To
turn an interesting thief into a tedious honest man was not his aim. He would
have thought little of the Prisoners’ Aid Society and other modern movements
of the kind. The conversion of a publican into a Pharisee would not have
seemed to him a great achievement. But in a manner not yet understood of the
world he regarded sin and suffering as being in themselves beautiful holy
things and modes of perfection.
It seems a very dangerous idea. It is—all great ideas are dangerous. That it
was Christ’s creed admits of no doubt. That it is the true creed I don’t doubt
myself.
Of course the sinner must repent. But why? Simply because otherwise he
would be unable to realise what he had done. The moment of repentance is
the moment of initiation. More than that: it is the means by which one alters
one’s past. The Greeks thought that impossible. They often say in their
Gnomic aphorisms, ‘Even the Gods cannot alter the past.’ Christ showed that
the commonest sinner could do it, that it was the one thing he could do.
Christ, had he been asked, would have said—I feel quite certain about it—that
the moment the prodigal son fell on his knees and wept, he made his having
wasted his substance with harlots, his swine-herding and hungering for the
husks they ate, beautiful and holy moments in his life. It is difficult for most
people to grasp the idea. I dare say one has to go to prison to understand it. If
so, it may be worth while going to prison.
There is something so unique about Christ. Of course just as there are false
dawns before the dawn itself, and winter days so full of sudden sunlight that
they will cheat the wise crocus into squandering its gold before its time, and
make some foolish bird call to its mate to build on barren boughs, so there
were Christians before Christ. For that we should be grateful. The
unfortunate thing is that there have been none since. I make one exception, St.
Francis of Assisi. But then God had given him at his birth the soul of a poet,
as he himself when quite young had in mystical marriage taken poverty as his
bride: and with the soul of a poet and the body of a beggar he found the way to

perfection not difficult. He understood Christ, and so he became like him. We
do not require the Liber Conformitatum to teach us that the life of St. Francis
was the true Imitatio Christi, a poem compared to which the book of that name
is merely prose.
Indeed, that is the charm about Christ, when all is said: he is just like a work
of art. He does not really teach one anything, but by being brought into his
presence one becomes something. And everybody is predestined to his
presence. Once at least in his life each man walks with Christ to Emmaus.
As regards the other subject, the Relation of the Artistic Life to Conduct, it
will no doubt seem strange to you that I should select it. People point to
Reading Gaol and say, ‘That is where the artistic life leads a man.’ Well, it
might lead to worse places. The more mechanical people to whom life is a
shrewd speculation depending on a careful calculation of ways and means,
always know where they are going, and go there. They start with the ideal
desire of being the parish beadle, and in whatever sphere they are placed they
succeed in being the parish beadle and no more. A man whose desire is to be
something separate from himself, to be a member of Parliament, or a
successful grocer, or a prominent solicitor, or a judge, or something equally
tedious, invariably succeeds in being what he wants to be. That is his
punishment. Those who want a mask have to wear it.
But with the dynamic forces of life, and those in whom those dynamic forces
become incarnate, it is different. People whose desire is solely for selfrealisation never know where they are going. They can’t know. In one sense
of the word it is of course necessary, as the Greek oracle said, to know oneself:
that is the first achievement of knowledge. But to recognise that the soul of a
man is unknowable, is the ultimate achievement of wisdom. The final mystery
is oneself. When one has weighed the sun in the balance, and measured the
steps of the moon, and mapped out the seven heavens star by star, there still
remains oneself. Who can calculate the orbit of his own soul? When the son
went out to look for his father’s asses, he did not know that a man of God was
waiting for him with the very chrism of coronation, and that his own soul was
already the soul of a king.
I hope to live long enough and to produce work of such a character that I shall
be able at the end of my days to say, ‘Yes! this is just where the artistic life
leads a man!’ Two of the most perfect lives I have come across in my own
experience are the lives of Verlaine and of Prince Kropotkin: both of them
men who have passed years in prison: the first, the one Christian poet since
Dante; the other, a man with a soul of that beautiful white Christ which seems
coming out of Russia. And for the last seven or eight months, in spite of a
succession of great troubles reaching me from the outside world almost
without intermission, I have been placed in direct contact with a new spirit

working in this prison through man and things, that has helped me beyond any
possibility of expression in words: so that while for the first year of my
imprisonment I did nothing else, and can remember doing nothing else, but
wring my hands in impotent despair, and say, ‘What an ending, what an
appalling ending!’ now I try to say to myself, and sometimes when I am not
torturing myself do really and sincerely say, ‘What a beginning, what a
wonderful beginning!’ It may really be so. It may become so. If it does I shall
owe much to this new personality that has altered every man’s life in this
place.
You may realise it when I say that had I been released last May, as I tried to
be, I would have left this place loathing it and every official in it with a
bitterness of hatred that would have poisoned my life. I have had a year
longer of imprisonment, but humanity has been in the prison along with us all,
and now when I go out I shall always remember great kindnesses that I have
received here from almost everybody, and on the day of my release I shall give
many thanks to many people, and ask to be remembered by them in turn.
The prison style is absolutely and entirely wrong. I would give anything to be
able to alter it when I go out. I intend to try. But there is nothing in the world
so wrong but that the spirit of humanity, which is the spirit of love, the spirit of
the Christ who is not in churches, may make it, if not right, at least possible to
be borne without too much bitterness of heart.
I know also that much is waiting for me outside that is very delightful, from
what St. Francis of Assisi calls ‘my brother the wind, and my sister the rain,’
lovely things both of them, down to the shop-windows and sunsets of great
cities. If I made a list of all that still remains to me, I don’t know where I
should stop: for, indeed, God made the world just as much for me as for any
one else. Perhaps I may go out with something that I had not got before. I
need not tell you that to me reformations in morals are as meaningless and
vulgar as Reformations in theology. But while to propose to be a better man is
a piece of unscientific cant, to have become a deeper man is the privilege of
those who have suffered. And such I think I have become.
If after I am free a friend of mine gave a feast, and did not invite me to it, I
should not mind a bit. I can be perfectly happy by myself. With freedom,
flowers, books, and the moon, who could not be perfectly happy? Besides,
feasts are not for me any more. I have given too many to care about them.
That side of life is over for me, very fortunately, I dare say. But if after I am
free a friend of mine had a sorrow and refused to allow me to share it, I should
feel it most bitterly. If he shut the doors of the house of mourning against me,
I would come back again and again and beg to be admitted, so that I might
share in what I was entitled to share in. If he thought me unworthy, unfit to
weep with him, I should feel it as the most poignant humiliation, as the most

terrible mode in which disgrace could be inflicted on me. But that could not
be. I have a right to share in sorrow, and he who can look at the loveliness of
the world and share its sorrow, and realise something of the wonder of both, is
in immediate contact with divine things, and has got as near to God’s secret as
any one can get.
Perhaps there may come into my art also, no less than into my life, a still
deeper note, one of greater unity of passion, and directness of impulse. Not
width but intensity is the true aim of modern art. We are no longer in art
concerned with the type. It is with the exception that we have to do. I cannot
put my sufferings into any form they took, I need hardly say. Art only begins
where Imitation ends, but something must come into my work, of fuller
memory of words perhaps, of richer cadences, of more curious effects, of
simpler architectural order, of some aesthetic quality at any rate.
When Marsyas was ‘torn from the scabbard of his limbs’—della vagina della
membre sue, to use one of Dante’s most terrible Tacitean phrases—he had no
more song, the Greek said. Apollo had been victor. The lyre had vanquished
the reed. But perhaps the Greeks were mistaken. I hear in much modern Art
the cry of Marsyas. It is bitter in Baudelaire, sweet and plaintive in Lamartine,
mystic in Verlaine. It is in the deferred resolutions of Chopin’s music. It is in
the discontent that haunts Burne-Jones’s women. Even Matthew Arnold,
whose song of Callicles tells of ‘the triumph of the sweet persuasive lyre,’ and
the ‘famous final victory,’ in such a clear note of lyrical beauty, has not a little
of it; in the troubled undertone of doubt and distress that haunts his verses,
neither Goethe nor Wordsworth could help him, though he followed each in
turn, and when he seeks to mourn for Thyrsis or to sing of the Scholar Gipsy,
it is the reed that he has to take for the rendering of his strain. But whether or
not the Phrygian Faun was silent, I cannot be. Expression is as necessary to me
as leaf and blossoms are to the black branches of the trees that show
themselves above the prison walls and are so restless in the wind. Between my
art and the world there is now a wide gulf, but between art and myself there is
none. I hope at least that there is none.
To each of us different fates are meted out. My lot has been one of public
infamy, of long imprisonment, of misery, of ruin, of disgrace, but I am not
worthy of it—not yet, at any rate. I remember that I used to say that I thought I
could bear a real tragedy if it came to me with purple pall and a mask of noble
sorrow, but that the dreadful thing about modernity was that it put tragedy into
the raiment of comedy, so that the great realities seemed commonplace or
grotesque or lacking in style. It is quite true about modernity. It has probably
always been true about actual life. It is said that all martyrdoms seemed mean
to the looker on. The nineteenth century is no exception to the rule.
Everything about my tragedy has been hideous, mean, repellent, lacking in

style; our very dress makes us grotesque. We are the zanies of sorrow. We are
clowns whose hearts are broken. We are specially designed to appeal to the
sense of humour. On November 13th, 1895, I was brought down here from
London. From two o’clock till half-past two on that day I had to stand on the
centre platform of Clapham Junction in convict dress, and handcuffed, for the
world to look at. I had been taken out of the hospital ward without a
moment’s notice being given to me. Of all possible objects I was the most
grotesque. When people saw me they laughed. Each train as it came up
swelled the audience. Nothing could exceed their amusement. That was, of
course, before they knew who I was. As soon as they had been informed they
laughed still more. For half an hour I stood there in the grey November rain
surrounded by a jeering mob.
For a year after that was done to me I wept every day at the same hour and for
the same space of time. That is not such a tragic thing as possibly it sounds to
you. To those who are in prison tears are a part of every day’s experience. A
day in prison on which one does not weep is a day on which one’s heart is
hard, not a day on which one’s heart is happy.
Well, now I am really beginning to feel more regret for the people who
laughed than for myself. Of course when they saw me I was not on my
pedestal, I was in the pillory. But it is a very unimaginative nature that only
cares for people on their pedestals. A pedestal may be a very unreal thing. A
pillory is a terrific reality. They should have known also how to interpret
sorrow better. I have said that behind sorrow there is always sorrow. It were
wiser still to say that behind sorrow there is always a soul. And to mock at a
soul in pain is a dreadful thing. In the strangely simple economy of the world
people only get what they give, and to those who have not enough imagination
to penetrate the mere outward of things, and feel pity, what pity can be given
save that of scorn?
I write this account of the mode of my being transferred here simply that it
should be realised how hard it has been for me to get anything out of my
punishment but bitterness and despair. I have, however, to do it, and now and
then I have moments of submission and acceptance. All the spring may be
hidden in the single bud, and the low ground nest of the lark may hold the joy
that is to herald the feet of many rose-red dawns. So perhaps whatever beauty
of life still remains to me is contained in some moment of surrender,
abasement, and humiliation. I can, at any rate, merely proceed on the lines of
my own development, and, accepting all that has happened to me, make
myself worthy of it.
People used to say of me that I was too individualistic. I must be far more of
an individualist than ever I was. I must get far more out of myself than ever I
got, and ask far less of the world than ever I asked. Indeed, my ruin came not

from too great individualism of life, but from too little. The one disgraceful,
unpardonable, and to all time contemptible action of my life was to allow
myself to appeal to society for help and protection. To have made such an
appeal would have been from the individualist point of view bad enough, but
what excuse can there ever be put forward for having made it? Of course once
I had put into motion the forces of society, society turned on me and said,
‘Have you been living all this time in defiance of my laws, and do you now
appeal to those laws for protection? You shall have those laws exercised to
the full. You shall abide by what you have appealed to.’ The result is I am in
gaol. Certainly no man ever fell so ignobly, and by such ignoble instruments,
as I did.
The Philistine element in life is not the failure to understand art. Charming
people, such as fishermen, shepherds, ploughboys, peasants and the like, know
nothing about art, and are the very salt of the earth. He is the Philistine who
upholds and aids the heavy, cumbrous, blind, mechanical forces of society, and
who does not recognise dynamic force when he meets it either in a man or a
movement.
People thought it dreadful of me to have entertained at dinner the evil things of
life, and to have found pleasure in their company. But then, from the point of
view through which I, as an artist in life, approach them they were delightfully
suggestive and stimulating. The danger was half the excitement. . . . My
business as an artist was with Ariel. I set myself to wrestle with Caliban. . . .
A great friend of mine—a friend of ten years’ standing—came to see me some
time ago, and told me that he did not believe a single word of what was said
against me, and wished me to know that he considered me quite innocent, and
the victim of a hideous plot. I burst into tears at what he said, and told him
that while there was much amongst the definite charges that was quite untrue
and transferred to me by revolting malice, still that my life had been full of
perverse pleasures, and that unless he accepted that as a fact about me and
realised it to the full I could not possibly be friends with him anymore, or ever
be in his company. It was a terrible shock to him, but we are friends, and I
have not got his friendship on false pretences.
Emotional forces, as I say somewhere in Intentions, are as limited in extent
and duration as the forces of physical energy. The little cup that is made to
hold so much can hold so much and no more, though all the purple vats of
Burgundy be filled with wine to the brim, and the treaders stand knee-deep in
the gathered grapes of the stony vineyards of Spain. There is no error more
common than that of thinking that those who are the causes or occasions of
great tragedies share in the feelings suitable to the tragic mood: no error more
fatal than expecting it of them. The martyr in his ‘shirt of flame’ may be
looking on the face of God, but to him who is piling the faggots or loosening

the logs for the blast the whole scene is no more than the slaying of an ox is to
the butcher, or the felling of a tree to the charcoal burner in the forest, or the
fall of a flower to one who is mowing down the grass with a scythe. Great
passions are for the great of soul, and great events can be seen only by those
who are on a level with them.
I know of nothing in all drama more incomparable from the point of view of
art, nothing more suggestive in its subtlety of observation, than Shakespeare’s
drawing of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. They are Hamlet’s college friends.
They have been his companions. They bring with them memories of pleasant
days together. At the moment when they come across him in the play he is
staggering under the weight of a burden intolerable to one of his temperament.
The dead have come armed out of the grave to impose on him a mission at
once too great and too mean for him. He is a dreamer, and he is called upon to
act. He has the nature of the poet, and he is asked to grapple with the common
complexity of cause and effect, with life in its practical realisation, of which
he knows nothing, not with life in its ideal essence, of which he knows so
much. He has no conception of what to do, and his folly is to feign folly.
Brutus used madness as a cloak to conceal the sword of his purpose, the
dagger of his will, but the Hamlet madness is a mere mask for the hiding of
weakness. In the making of fancies and jests he sees a chance of delay. He
keeps playing with action as an artist plays with a theory. He makes himself
the spy of his proper actions, and listening to his own words knows them to be
but ‘words, words, words.’ Instead of trying to be the hero of his own history,
he seeks to be the spectator of his own tragedy. He disbelieves in everything,
including himself, and yet his doubt helps him not, as it comes not from
scepticism but from a divided will.
Of all this Guildenstern and Rosencrantz realise nothing. They bow and smirk
and smile, and what the one says the other echoes with sickliest intonation.
When, at last, by means of the play within the play, and the puppets in their
dalliance, Hamlet ‘catches the conscience’ of the King, and drives the
wretched man in terror from his throne, Guildenstern and Rosencrantz see no
more in his conduct than a rather painful breach of Court etiquette. That is as
far as they can attain to in ‘the contemplation of the spectacle of life with
appropriate emotions.’ They are close to his very secret and know nothing of
it. Nor would there be any use in telling them. They are the little cups that
can hold so much and no more. Towards the close it is suggested that, caught
in a cunning spring set for another, they have met, or may meet, with a violent
and sudden death. But a tragic ending of this kind, though touched by
Hamlet’s humour with something of the surprise and justice of comedy, is
really not for such as they. They never die. Horatio, who in order to ‘report

Hamlet and his cause aright to the unsatisfied,’
‘Absents him from felicity a while,
And in this harsh world draws his breath in pain,’
dies, but Guildenstern and Rosencrantz are as immortal as Angelo and
Tartuffe, and should rank with them. They are what modern life has
contributed to the antique ideal of friendship. He who writes a new De
Amicitia must find a niche for them, and praise them in Tusculan prose. They
are types fixed for all time. To censure them would show ‘a lack of
appreciation.’ They are merely out of their sphere: that is all. In sublimity of
soul there is no contagion. High thoughts and high emotions are by their very
existence isolated.
I am to be released, if all goes well with me, towards the end of May, and hope
to go at once to some little sea-side village abroad with R--- and M---.
The sea, as Euripides says in one of his plays about Iphigeneia, washes away
the stains and wounds of the world.
I hope to be at least a month with my friends, and to gain peace and balance,
and a less troubled heart, and a sweeter mood. I have a strange longing for the
great simple primeval things, such as the sea, to me no less of a mother than
the Earth. It seems to me that we all look at Nature too much, and live with
her too little. I discern great sanity in the Greek attitude. They never chattered
about sunsets, or discussed whether the shadows on the grass were really
mauve or not. But they saw that the sea was for the swimmer, and the sand for
the feet of the runner. They loved the trees for the shadow that they cast, and
the forest for its silence at noon. The vineyard-dresser wreathed his hair with
ivy that he might keep off the rays of the sun as he stooped over the young
shoots, and for the artist and the athlete, the two types that Greece gave us,
they plaited with garlands the leaves of the bitter laurel and of the wild
parsley, which else had been of no service to men.
We call ours a utilitarian age, and we do not know the uses of any single thing.
We have forgotten that water can cleanse, and fire purify, and that the Earth is
mother to us all. As a consequence our art is of the moon and plays with
shadows, while Greek art is of the sun and deals directly with things. I feel
sure that in elemental forces there is purification, and I want to go back to
them and live in their presence.
Of course to one so modern as I am, ‘Enfant de mon siècle,’ merely to look at
the world will be always lovely. I tremble with pleasure when I think that on
the very day of my leaving prison both the laburnum and the lilac will be
blooming in the gardens, and that I shall see the wind stir into restless beauty

the swaying gold of the one, and make the other toss the pale purple of its
plumes, so that all the air shall be Arabia for me. Linnaeus fell on his knees
and wept for joy when he saw for the first time the long heath of some English
upland made yellow with the tawny aromatic brooms of the common furze;
and I know that for me, to whom flowers are part of desire, there are tears
waiting in the petals of some rose. It has always been so with me from my
boyhood. There is not a single colour hidden away in the chalice of a flower,
or the curve of a shell, to which, by some subtle sympathy with the very soul
of things, my nature does not answer. Like Gautier, I have always been one of
those ‘pour qui le monde visible existe.’
Still, I am conscious now that behind all this beauty, satisfying though it may
be, there is some spirit hidden of which the painted forms and shapes are but
modes of manifestation, and it is with this spirit that I desire to become in
harmony. I have grown tired of the articulate utterances of men and things.
The Mystical in Art, the Mystical in Life, the Mystical in Nature this is what I
am looking for. It is absolutely necessary for me to find it somewhere.
All trials are trials for one’s life, just as all sentences are sentences of death;
and three times have I been tried. The first time I left the box to be arrested,
the second time to be led back to the house of detention, the third time to pass
into a prison for two years. Society, as we have constituted it, will have no
place for me, has none to offer; but Nature, whose sweet rains fall on unjust
and just alike, will have clefts in the rocks where I may hide, and secret
valleys in whose silence I may weep undisturbed. She will hang the night with
stars so that I may walk abroad in the darkness without stumbling, and send
the wind over my footprints so that none may track me to my hurt: she will
cleanse me in great waters, and with bitter herbs make me whole.
A House of Pomegranates
By
Oscar Wilde

A HOUSE OF POMEGRANATES
THE YOUNG KING
[TO MARGARET LADY BROOKE - THE RANEE OF SARAWAK]
It was the night before the day fixed for his coronation, and the young King
was sitting alone in his beautiful chamber. His courtiers had all taken their
leave of him, bowing their heads to the ground, according to the ceremonious
usage of the day, and had retired to the Great Hall of the Palace, to receive a
few last lessons from the Professor of Etiquette; there being some of them who
had still quite natural manners, which in a courtier is, I need hardly say, a very
grave offence.
The lad - for he was only a lad, being but sixteen years of age - was not sorry
at their departure, and had flung himself back with a deep sigh of relief on the
soft cushions of his embroidered couch, lying there, wild-eyed and openmouthed, like a brown woodland Faun, or some young animal of the forest
newly snared by the hunters.
And, indeed, it was the hunters who had found him, coming upon him almost
by chance as, bare-limbed and pipe in hand, he was following the flock of the

poor goatherd who had brought him up, and whose son he had always fancied
himself to be. The child of the old King’s only daughter by a secret marriage
with one much beneath her in station - a stranger, some said, who, by the
wonderful magic of his lute-playing, had made the young Princess love him;
while others spoke of an artist from Rimini, to whom the Princess had shown
much, perhaps too much honour, and who had suddenly disappeared from the
city, leaving his work in the Cathedral unfinished - he had been, when but a
week old, stolen away from his mother’s side, as she slept, and given into the
charge of a common peasant and his wife, who were without children of their
own, and lived in a remote part of the forest, more than a day’s ride from the
town. Grief, or the plague, as the court physician stated, or, as some
suggested, a swift Italian poison administered in a cup of spiced wine, slew,
within an hour of her wakening, the white girl who had given him birth, and as
the trusty messenger who bare the child across his saddle-bow stooped from
his weary horse and knocked at the rude door of the goatherd’s hut, the body
of the Princess was being lowered into an open grave that had been dug in a
deserted churchyard, beyond the city gates, a grave where it was said that
another body was also lying, that of a young man of marvellous and foreign
beauty, whose hands were tied behind him with a knotted cord, and whose
breast was stabbed with many red wounds.
Such, at least, was the story that men whispered to each other. Certain it was
that the old King, when on his deathbed, whether moved by remorse for his
great sin, or merely desiring that the kingdom should not pass away from his
line, had had the lad sent for, and, in the presence of the Council, had
acknowledged him as his heir.
And it seems that from the very first moment of his recognition he had shown
signs of that strange passion for beauty that was destined to have so great an
influence over his life. Those who accompanied him to the suite of rooms set
apart for his service, often spoke of the cry of pleasure that broke from his lips
when he saw the delicate raiment and rich jewels that had been prepared for
him, and of the almost fierce joy with which he flung aside his rough leathern
tunic and coarse sheepskin cloak. He missed, indeed, at times the fine
freedom of his forest life, and was always apt to chafe at the tedious Court
ceremonies that occupied so much of each day, but the wonderful palace
- Joyeuse, as they called it - of which he now found himself lord, seemed to
him to be a new world fresh-fashioned for his delight; and as soon as he could
escape from the council-board or audience-chamber, he would run down the
great staircase, with its lions of gilt bronze and its steps of bright porphyry,
and wander from room to room, and from corridor to corridor, like one who
was seeking to find in beauty an anodyne from pain, a sort of restoration from
sickness.

Upon these journeys of discovery, as he would call them - and, indeed, they
were to him real voyages through a marvellous land, he would sometimes be
accompanied by the slim, fair-haired Court pages, with their floating mantles,
and gay fluttering ribands; but more often he would be alone, feeling through a
certain quick instinct, which was almost a divination, that the secrets of art are
best learned in secret, and that Beauty, like Wisdom, loves the lonely
worshipper.
Many curious stories were related about him at this period. It was said that a
stout Burgo-master, who had come to deliver a florid oratorical address on
behalf of the citizens of the town, had caught sight of him kneeling in real
adoration before a great picture that had just been brought from Venice, and
that seemed to herald the worship of some new gods. On another occasion he
had been missed for several hours, and after a lengthened search had been
discovered in a little chamber in one of the northern turrets of the palace
gazing, as one in a trance, at a Greek gem carved with the figure of Adonis.
He had been seen, so the tale ran, pressing his warm lips to the marble brow of
an antique statue that had been discovered in the bed of the river on the
occasion of the building of the stone bridge, and was inscribed with the name
of the Bithynian slave of Hadrian. He had passed a whole night in noting the
effect of the moonlight on a silver image of Endymion.
All rare and costly materials had certainly a great fascination for him, and in
his eagerness to procure them he had sent away many merchants, some to
traffic for amber with the rough fisher-folk of the north seas, some to Egypt to
look for that curious green turquoise which is found only in the tombs of
kings, and is said to possess magical properties, some to Persia for silken
carpets and painted pottery, and others to India to buy gauze and stained ivory,
moonstones and bracelets of jade, sandal-wood and blue enamel and shawls of
fine wool.
But what had occupied him most was the robe he was to wear at his
coronation, the robe of tissued gold, and the ruby-studded crown, and the
sceptre with its rows and rings of pearls. Indeed, it was of this that he was
thinking to-night, as he lay back on his luxurious couch, watching the great
pinewood log that was burning itself out on the open hearth. The designs,
which were from the hands of the most famous artists of the time, had been
submitted to him many months before, and he had given orders that the
artificers were to toil night and day to carry them out, and that the whole world
was to be searched for jewels that would be worthy of their work. He saw
himself in fancy standing at the high altar of the cathedral in the fair raiment
of a King, and a smile played and lingered about his boyish lips, and lit up
with a bright lustre his dark woodland eyes.

After some time he rose from his seat, and leaning against the carved
penthouse of the chimney, looked round at the dimly-lit room. The walls were
hung with rich tapestries representing the Triumph of Beauty. A large press,
inlaid with agate and lapis-lazuli, filled one corner, and facing the window
stood a curiously wrought cabinet with lacquer panels of powdered and
mosaiced gold, on which were placed some delicate goblets of Venetian glass,
and a cup of dark-veined onyx. Pale poppies were broidered on the silk
coverlet of the bed, as though they had fallen from the tired hands of sleep,
and tall reeds of fluted ivory bare up the velvet canopy, from which great tufts
of ostrich plumes sprang, like white foam, to the pallid silver of the fretted
ceiling. A laughing Narcissus in green bronze held a polished mirror above its
head. On the table stood a flat bowl of amethyst.
Outside he could see the huge dome of the cathedral, looming like a bubble
over the shadowy houses, and the weary sentinels pacing up and down on the
misty terrace by the river. Far away, in an orchard, a nightingale was singing.
A faint perfume of jasmine came through the open window. He brushed his
brown curls back from his forehead, and taking up a lute, let his fingers stray
across the cords. His heavy eyelids drooped, and a strange languor came over
him. Never before had he felt so keenly, or with such exquisite joy, the magic
and the mystery of beautiful things.
When midnight sounded from the clock-tower he touched a bell, and his pages
entered and disrobed him with much ceremony, pouring rose-water over his
hands, and strewing flowers on his pillow. A few moments after that they had
left the room, he fell asleep.
And as he slept he dreamed a dream, and this was his dream.
He thought that he was standing in a long, low attic, amidst the whir and
clatter of many looms. The meagre daylight peered in through the grated
windows, and showed him the gaunt figures of the weavers bending over their
cases. Pale, sickly-looking children were crouched on the huge crossbeams.
As the shuttles dashed through the warp they lifted up the heavy battens, and
when the shuttles stopped they let the battens fall and pressed the threads
together. Their faces were pinched with famine, and their thin hands shook
and trembled. Some haggard women were seated at a table sewing. A
horrible odour filled the place. The air was foul and heavy, and the walls
dripped and streamed with damp.
The young King went over to one of the weavers, and stood by him and
watched him.
And the weaver looked at him angrily, and said, ‘Why art thou watching me?

Art thou a spy set on us by our master?’
‘Who is thy master?’ asked the young King.
‘Our master!’ cried the weaver, bitterly. ‘He is a man like myself. Indeed,
there is but this difference between us - that he wears fine clothes while I go in
rags, and that while I am weak from hunger he suffers not a little from
overfeeding.’
‘The land is free,’ said the young King, ‘and thou art no man’s slave.’
‘In war,’ answered the weaver, ‘the strong make slaves of the weak, and in
peace the rich make slaves of the poor. We must work to live, and they give us
such mean wages that we die. We toil for them all day long, and they heap up
gold in their coffers, and our children fade away before their time, and the
faces of those we love become hard and evil. We tread out the grapes, and
another drinks the wine. We sow the corn, and our own board is empty. We
have chains, though no eye beholds them; and are slaves, though men call us
free.’
‘Is it so with all?’ he asked,
‘It is so with all,’ answered the weaver, ‘with the young as well as with the
old, with the women as well as with the men, with the little children as well as
with those who are stricken in years. The merchants grind us down, and we
must needs do their bidding. The priest rides by and tells his beads, and no
man has care of us. Through our sunless lanes creeps Poverty with her hungry
eyes, and Sin with his sodden face follows close behind her. Misery wakes us
in the morning, and Shame sits with us at night. But what are these things to
thee? Thou art not one of us. Thy face is too happy.’ And he turned away
scowling, and threw the shuttle across the loom, and the young King saw that
it was threaded with a thread of gold.
And a great terror seized upon him, and he said to the weaver, ‘What robe is
this that thou art weaving?’
‘It is the robe for the coronation of the young King,’ he answered; ‘what is that
to thee?’
And the young King gave a loud cry and woke, and lo! he was in his own
chamber, and through the window he saw the great honey-coloured moon
hanging in the dusky air.
And he fell asleep again and dreamed, and this was his dream.
He thought that he was lying on the deck of a huge galley that was being
rowed by a hundred slaves. On a carpet by his side the master of the galley

was seated. He was black as ebony, and his turban was of crimson silk. Great
earrings of silver dragged down the thick lobes of his ears, and in his hands he
had a pair of ivory scales.
The slaves were naked, but for a ragged loin-cloth, and each man was chained
to his neighbour. The hot sun beat brightly upon them, and the negroes ran up
and down the gangway and lashed them with whips of hide. They stretched
out their lean arms and pulled the heavy oars through the water. The salt spray
flew from the blades.
At last they reached a little bay, and began to take soundings. A light wind
blew from the shore, and covered the deck and the great lateen sail with a fine
red dust. Three Arabs mounted on wild asses rode out and threw spears at
them. The master of the galley took a painted bow in his hand and shot one of
them in the throat. He fell heavily into the surf, and his companions galloped
away. A woman wrapped in a yellow veil followed slowly on a camel,
looking back now and then at the dead body.
As soon as they had cast anchor and hauled down the sail, the negroes went
into the hold and brought up a long rope-ladder, heavily weighted with lead.
The master of the galley threw it over the side, making the ends fast to two
iron stanchions. Then the negroes seized the youngest of the slaves and
knocked his gyves off, and filled his nostrils and his ears with wax, and tied a
big stone round his waist. He crept wearily down the ladder, and disappeared
into the sea. A few bubbles rose where he sank. Some of the other slaves
peered curiously over the side. At the prow of the galley sat a shark-charmer,
beating monotonously upon a drum.
After some time the diver rose up out of the water, and clung panting to the
ladder with a pearl in his right hand. The negroes seized it from him, and
thrust him back. The slaves fell asleep over their oars.
Again and again he came up, and each time that he did so he brought with him
a beautiful pearl. The master of the galley weighed them, and put them into a
little bag of green leather.
The young King tried to speak, but his tongue seemed to cleave to the roof of
his mouth, and his lips refused to move. The Negroes chattered to each other,
and began to quarrel over a string of bright beads. Two cranes flew round and
round the vessel.
Then the diver came up for the last time, and the pearl that he brought with
him was fairer than all the pearls of Ormuz, for it was shaped like the full
moon, and whiter than the morning star. But his face was strangely pale, and
as he fell upon the deck the blood gushed from his ears and nostrils. He
quivered for a little, and then he was still. The negroes shrugged their

shoulders, and threw the body overboard.
And the master of the galley laughed, and, reaching out, he took the pearl, and
when he saw it he pressed it to his forehead and bowed. ‘It shall be,’ he said,
‘for the sceptre of the young King,’ and he made a sign to the negroes to draw
up the anchor.
And when the young King heard this he gave a great cry, and woke, and
through the window he saw the long grey fingers of the dawn clutching at the
fading stars.
And he fell asleep again, and dreamed, and this was his dream.
He thought that he was wandering through a dim wood, hung with strange
fruits and with beautiful poisonous flowers. The adders hissed at him as he
went by, and the bright parrots flew screaming from branch to branch. Huge
tortoises lay asleep upon the hot mud. The trees were full of apes and
peacocks.
On and on he went, till he reached the outskirts of the wood, and there he saw
an immense multitude of men toiling in the bed of a dried-up river. They
swarmed up the crag like ants. They dug deep pits in the ground and went
down into them. Some of them cleft the rocks with great axes; others grabbled
in the sand.
They tore up the cactus by its roots, and trampled on the scarlet blossoms.
They hurried about, calling to each other, and no man was idle.
From the darkness of a cavern Death and Avarice watched them, and Death
said, ‘I am weary; give me a third of them and let me go.’ But Avarice shook
her head. ‘They are my servants,’ she answered.
And Death said to her, ‘What hast thou in thy hand?’
‘I have three grains of corn,’ she answered; ‘what is that to thee?’
‘Give me one of them,’ cried Death, ‘to plant in my garden; only one of them,
and I will go away.’
‘I will not give thee anything,’ said Avarice, and she hid her hand in the fold of
her raiment.
And Death laughed, and took a cup, and dipped it into a pool of water, and out
of the cup rose Ague. She passed through the great multitude, and a third of
them lay dead. A cold mist followed her, and the water-snakes ran by her side.
And when Avarice saw that a third of the multitude was dead she beat her
breast and wept. She beat her barren bosom, and cried aloud. ‘Thou hast slain

a third of my servants,’ she cried, ‘get thee gone. There is war in the
mountains of Tartary, and the kings of each side are calling to thee. The
Afghans have slain the black ox, and are marching to battle. They have beaten
upon their shields with their spears, and have put on their helmets of iron.
What is my valley to thee, that thou shouldst tarry in it? Get thee gone, and
come here no more.’
‘Nay,’ answered Death, ‘but till thou hast given me a grain of corn I will not
go.’
But Avarice shut her hand, and clenched her teeth. ‘I will not give thee
anything,’ she muttered.
And Death laughed, and took up a black stone, and threw it into the forest, and
out of a thicket of wild hemlock came Fever in a robe of flame. She passed
through the multitude, and touched them, and each man that she touched died.
The grass withered beneath her feet as she walked.
And Avarice shuddered, and put ashes on her head. ‘Thou art cruel,’ she cried;
‘thou art cruel. There is famine in the walled cities of India, and the cisterns
of Samarcand have run dry. There is famine in the walled cities of Egypt, and
the locusts have come up from the desert. The Nile has not overflowed its
banks, and the priests have cursed Isis and Osiris. Get thee gone to those who
need thee, and leave me my servants.’
‘Nay,’ answered Death, ‘but till thou hast given me a grain of corn I will not
go.’
‘I will not give thee anything,’ said Avarice.
And Death laughed again, and he whistled through his fingers, and a woman
came flying through the air. Plague was written upon her forehead, and a
crowd of lean vultures wheeled round her. She covered the valley with her
wings, and no man was left alive.
And Avarice fled shrieking through the forest, and Death leaped upon his red
horse and galloped away, and his galloping was faster than the wind.
And out of the slime at the bottom of the valley crept dragons and horrible
things with scales, and the jackals came trotting along the sand, sniffing up the
air with their nostrils.
And the young King wept, and said: ‘Who were these men, and for what were
they seeking?’
‘For rubies for a king’s crown,’ answered one who stood behind him.
And the young King started, and, turning round, he saw a man habited as a

pilgrim and holding in his hand a mirror of silver.
And he grew pale, and said: ‘For what king?’
And the pilgrim answered: ‘Look in this mirror, and thou shalt see him.’
And he looked in the mirror, and, seeing his own face, he gave a great cry and
woke, and the bright sunlight was streaming into the room, and from the trees
of the garden and pleasaunce the birds were singing.
And the Chamberlain and the high officers of State came in and made
obeisance to him, and the pages brought him the robe of tissued gold, and set
the crown and the sceptre before him.
And the young King looked at them, and they were beautiful. More beautiful
were they than aught that he had ever seen. But he remembered his dreams,
and he said to his lords: ‘Take these things away, for I will not wear them.’
And the courtiers were amazed, and some of them laughed, for they thought
that he was jesting.
But he spake sternly to them again, and said: ‘Take these things away, and
hide them from me. Though it be the day of my coronation, I will not wear
them. For on the loom of Sorrow, and by the white hands of Pain, has this my
robe been woven. There is Blood in the heart of the ruby, and Death in the
heart of the pearl.’ And he told them his three dreams.
And when the courtiers heard them they looked at each other and whispered,
saying: ‘Surely he is mad; for what is a dream but a dream, and a vision but a
vision? They are not real things that one should heed them. And what have
we to do with the lives of those who toil for us? Shall a man not eat bread till
he has seen the sower, nor drink wine till he has talked with the vinedresser?’
And the Chamberlain spake to the young King, and said, ‘My lord, I pray thee
set aside these black thoughts of thine, and put on this fair robe, and set this
crown upon thy head. For how shall the people know that thou art a king, if
thou hast not a king’s raiment?’
And the young King looked at him. ‘Is it so, indeed?’ he questioned. ‘Will
they not know me for a king if I have not a king’s raiment?’
‘They will not know thee, my lord,’ cried the Chamberlain.
‘I had thought that there had been men who were kinglike,’ he answered, ‘but
it may be as thou sayest. And yet I will not wear this robe, nor will I be
crowned with this crown, but even as I came to the palace so will I go forth
from it.’

And he bade them all leave him, save one page whom he kept as his
companion, a lad a year younger than himself. Him he kept for his service,
and when he had bathed himself in clear water, he opened a great painted
chest, and from it he took the leathern tunic and rough sheepskin cloak that he
had worn when he had watched on the hillside the shaggy goats of the
goatherd. These he put on, and in his hand he took his rude shepherd’s staff.
And the little page opened his big blue eyes in wonder, and said smiling to
him, ‘My lord, I see thy robe and thy sceptre, but where is thy crown?’
And the young King plucked a spray of wild briar that was climbing over the
balcony, and bent it, and made a circlet of it, and set it on his own head.
‘This shall he my crown,’ he answered.
And thus attired he passed out of his chamber into the Great Hall, where the
nobles were waiting for him.
And the nobles made merry, and some of them cried out to him, ‘My lord, the
people wait for their king, and thou showest them a beggar,’ and others were
wroth and said, ‘He brings shame upon our state, and is unworthy to be our
master.’ But he answered them not a word, but passed on, and went down the
bright porphyry staircase, and out through the gates of bronze, and mounted
upon his horse, and rode towards the cathedral, the little page running beside
him.
And the people laughed and said, ‘It is the King’s fool who is riding by,’ and
they mocked him.
And he drew rein and said, ‘Nay, but I am the King.’ And he told them his
three dreams.
And a man came out of the crowd and spake bitterly to him, and said, ‘Sir,
knowest thou not that out of the luxury of the rich cometh the life of the poor?
By your pomp we are nurtured, and your vices give us bread. To toil for a
hard master is bitter, but to have no master to toil for is more bitter still.
Thinkest thou that the ravens will feed us? And what cure hast thou for these
things? Wilt thou say to the buyer, “Thou shalt buy for so much,” and to the
seller, “Thou shalt sell at this price”? I trow not. Therefore go back to thy
Palace and put on thy purple and fine linen. What hast thou to do with us, and
what we suffer?’
‘Are not the rich and the poor brothers?’ asked the young King.
‘Ay,’ answered the man, ‘and the name of the rich brother is Cain.’
And the young King’s eyes filled with tears, and he rode on through the
murmurs of the people, and the little page grew afraid and left him.

And when he reached the great portal of the cathedral, the soldiers thrust their
halberts out and said, ‘What dost thou seek here? None enters by this door but
the King.’
And his face flushed with anger, and he said to them, ‘I am the King,’ and
waved their halberts aside and passed in.
And when the old Bishop saw him coming in his goatherd’s dress, he rose up
in wonder from his throne, and went to meet him, and said to him, ‘My son, is
this a king’s apparel? And with what crown shall I crown thee, and what
sceptre shall I place in thy hand? Surely this should be to thee a day of joy,
and not a day of abasement.’
‘Shall Joy wear what Grief has fashioned?’ said the young King. And he told
him his three dreams.
And when the Bishop had heard them he knit his brows, and said, ‘My son, I
am an old man, and in the winter of my days, and I know that many evil things
are done in the wide world. The fierce robbers come down from the
mountains, and carry off the little children, and sell them to the Moors. The
lions lie in wait for the caravans, and leap upon the camels. The wild boar
roots up the corn in the valley, and the foxes gnaw the vines upon the hill. The
pirates lay waste the sea-coast and burn the ships of the fishermen, and take
their nets from them. In the salt-marshes live the lepers; they have houses of
wattled reeds, and none may come nigh them. The beggars wander through
the cities, and eat their food with the dogs. Canst thou make these things not
to be? Wilt thou take the leper for thy bedfellow, and set the beggar at thy
board? Shall the lion do thy bidding, and the wild boar obey thee? Is not He
who made misery wiser than thou art? Wherefore I praise thee not for this that
thou hast done, but I bid thee ride back to the Palace and make thy face glad,
and put on the raiment that beseemeth a king, and with the crown of gold I
will crown thee, and the sceptre of pearl will I place in thy hand. And as for
thy dreams, think no more of them. The burden of this world is too great for
one man to bear, and the world’s sorrow too heavy for one heart to suffer.’
‘Sayest thou that in this house?’ said the young King, and he strode past the
Bishop, and climbed up the steps of the altar, and stood before the image of
Christ.
He stood before the image of Christ, and on his right hand and on his left were
the marvellous vessels of gold, the chalice with the yellow wine, and the vial
with the holy oil. He knelt before the image of Christ, and the great candles
burned brightly by the jewelled shrine, and the smoke of the incense curled in
thin blue wreaths through the dome. He bowed his head in prayer, and the
priests in their stiff copes crept away from the altar.

And suddenly a wild tumult came from the street outside, and in entered the
nobles with drawn swords and nodding plumes, and shields of polished steel.
‘Where is this dreamer of dreams?’ they cried. ‘Where is this King who is
apparelled like a beggar - this boy who brings shame upon our state? Surely
we will slay him, for he is unworthy to rule over us.’
And the young King bowed his head again, and prayed, and when he had
finished his prayer he rose up, and turning round he looked at them sadly.
And lo! through the painted windows came the sunlight streaming upon him,
and the sun-beams wove round him a tissued robe that was fairer than the robe
that had been fashioned for his pleasure. The dead staff blossomed, and bare
lilies that were whiter than pearls. The dry thorn blossomed, and bare roses
that were redder than rubies. Whiter than fine pearls were the lilies, and their
stems were of bright silver. Redder than male rubies were the roses, and their
leaves were of beaten gold.
He stood there in the raiment of a king, and the gates of the jewelled shrine
flew open, and from the crystal of the many-rayed monstrance shone a
marvellous and mystical light. He stood there in a king’s raiment, and the
Glory of God filled the place, and the saints in their carven niches seemed to
move. In the fair raiment of a king he stood before them, and the organ pealed
out its music, and the trumpeters blew upon their trumpets, and the singing
boys sang.
And the people fell upon their knees in awe, and the nobles sheathed their
swords and did homage, and the Bishop’s face grew pale, and his hands
trembled. ‘A greater than I hath crowned thee,’ he cried, and he knelt before
him.
And the young King came down from the high altar, and passed home through
the midst of the people. But no man dared look upon his face, for it was like
the face of an angel.

THE BIRTHDAY OF THE INFANTA
[TO MRS. WILLIAM H. GRENFELL OF TAPLOW COURT - LADY
DESBOROUGH]
It was the birthday of the Infanta. She was just twelve years of age, and the
sun was shining brightly in the gardens of the palace.
Although she was a real Princess and the Infanta of Spain, she had only one

birthday every year, just like the children of quite poor people, so it was
naturally a matter of great importance to the whole country that she should
have a really fine day for the occasion. And a really fine day it certainly was.
The tall striped tulips stood straight up upon their stalks, like long rows of
soldiers, and looked defiantly across the grass at the roses, and said: ‘We are
quite as splendid as you are now.’ The purple butterflies fluttered about with
gold dust on their wings, visiting each flower in turn; the little lizards crept out
of the crevices of the wall, and lay basking in the white glare; and the
pomegranates split and cracked with the heat, and showed their bleeding red
hearts. Even the pale yellow lemons that hung in such profusion from the
mouldering trellis and along the dim arcades seemed to have caught a richer
colour from the wonderful sunlight, and the magnolia trees opened their great
globe-like blossoms of folded ivory, and filled the air with a sweet heavy
perfume.
The little Princess herself walked up and down the terrace with her
companions, and played at hide and seek round the stone vases and the old
moss-grown statues. On ordinary days she was only allowed to play with
children of her own rank, so she had always to play alone, but her birthday
was an exception, and the King had given orders that she was to invite any of
her young friends whom she liked to come and amuse themselves with her.
There was a stately grace about these slim Spanish children as they glided
about, the boys with their large-plumed hats and short fluttering cloaks, the
girls holding up the trains of their long brocaded gowns, and shielding the sun
from their eyes with huge fans of black and silver. But the Infanta was the
most graceful of all, and the most tastefully attired, after the somewhat
cumbrous fashion of the day. Her robe was of grey satin, the skirt and the
wide puffed sleeves heavily embroidered with silver, and the stiff corset
studded with rows of fine pearls. Two tiny slippers with big pink rosettes
peeped out beneath her dress as she walked. Pink and pearl was her great
gauze fan, and in her hair, which like an aureole of faded gold stood out stiffly
round her pale little face, she had a beautiful white rose.
From a window in the palace the sad melancholy King watched them. Behind
him stood his brother, Don Pedro of Aragon, whom he hated, and his
confessor, the Grand Inquisitor of Granada, sat by his side. Sadder even than
usual was the King, for as he looked at the Infanta bowing with childish
gravity to the assembling counters, or laughing behind her fan at the grim
Duchess of Albuquerque who always accompanied her, he thought of the
young Queen, her mother, who but a short time before - so it seemed to him had come from the gay country of France, and had withered away in the
sombre splendour of the Spanish court, dying just six months after the birth of
her child, and before she had seen the almonds blossom twice in the orchard,

or plucked the second year’s fruit from the old gnarled fig-tree that stood in
the centre of the now grass-grown courtyard. So great had been his love for
her that he had not suffered even the grave to hide her from him. She had
been embalmed by a Moorish physician, who in return for this service had
been granted his life, which for heresy and suspicion of magical practices had
been already forfeited, men said, to the Holy Office, and her body was still
lying on its tapestried bier in the black marble chapel of the Palace, just as the
monks had borne her in on that windy March day nearly twelve years before.
Once every month the King, wrapped in a dark cloak and with a muffled
lantern in his hand, went in and knelt by her side calling out, ‘Mi reina! Mi
reina!’ and sometimes breaking through the formal etiquette that in Spain
governs every separate action of life, and sets limits even to the sorrow of a
King, he would clutch at the pale jewelled hands in a wild agony of grief, and
try to wake by his mad kisses the cold painted face.
To-day he seemed to see her again, as he had seen her first at the Castle of
Fontainebleau, when he was but fifteen years of age, and she still younger.
They had been formally betrothed on that occasion by the Papal Nuncio in the
presence of the French King and all the Court, and he had returned to the
Escurial bearing with him a little ringlet of yellow hair, and the memory of
two childish lips bending down to kiss his hand as he stepped into his
carriage. Later on had followed the marriage, hastily performed at Burgos, a
small town on the frontier between the two countries, and the grand public
entry into Madrid with the customary celebration of high mass at the Church
of La Atocha, and a more than usually solemnauto-da-fé, in which nearly three
hundred heretics, amongst whom were many Englishmen, had been delivered
over to the secular arm to be burned.
Certainly he had loved her madly, and to the ruin, many thought, of his
country, then at war with England for the possession of the empire of the New
World. He had hardly ever permitted her to be out of his sight; for her, he had
forgotten, or seemed to have forgotten, all grave affairs of State; and, with that
terrible blindness that passion brings upon its servants, he had failed to notice
that the elaborate ceremonies by which he sought to please her did but
aggravate the strange malady from which she suffered. When she died he
was, for a time, like one bereft of reason. Indeed, there is no doubt but that he
would have formally abdicated and retired to the great Trappist monastery at
Granada, of which he was already titular Prior, had he not been afraid to leave
the little Infanta at the mercy of his brother, whose cruelty, even in Spain, was
notorious, and who was suspected by many of having caused the Queen’s
death by means of a pair of poisoned gloves that he had presented to her on the
occasion of her visiting his castle in Aragon. Even after the expiration of the
three years of public mourning that he had ordained throughout his whole

dominions by royal edict, he would never suffer his ministers to speak about
any new alliance, and when the Emperor himself sent to him, and offered him
the hand of the lovely Archduchess of Bohemia, his niece, in marriage, he
bade the ambassadors tell their master that the King of Spain was already
wedded to Sorrow, and that though she was but a barren bride he loved her
better than Beauty; an answer that cost his crown the rich provinces of the
Netherlands, which soon after, at the Emperor’s instigation, revolted against
him under the leadership of some fanatics of the Reformed Church.
His whole married life, with its fierce, fiery-coloured joys and the terrible
agony of its sudden ending, seemed to come back to him to-day as he watched
the Infanta playing on the terrace. She had all the Queen’s pretty petulance of
manner, the same wilful way of tossing her head, the same proud curved
beautiful mouth, the same wonderful smile - vrai sourire de France indeed as she glanced up now and then at the window, or stretched out her little hand
for the stately Spanish gentlemen to kiss. But the shrill laughter of the
children grated on his ears, and the bright pitiless sunlight mocked his sorrow,
and a dull odour of strange spices, spices such as embalmers use, seemed to
taint - or was it fancy? - the clear morning air. He buried his face in his hands,
and when the Infanta looked up again the curtains had been drawn, and the
King had retired.
She made a little moue of disappointment, and shrugged her shoulders. Surely
he might have stayed with her on her birthday. What did the stupid Stateaffairs matter? Or had he gone to that gloomy chapel, where the candles were
always burning, and where she was never allowed to enter? How silly of him,
when the sun was shining so brightly, and everybody was so happy! Besides,
he would miss the sham bull-fight for which the trumpet was already
sounding, to say nothing of the puppet-show and the other wonderful things.
Her uncle and the Grand Inquisitor were much more sensible. They had come
out on the terrace, and paid her nice compliments. So she tossed her pretty
head, and taking Don Pedro by the hand, she walked slowly down the steps
towards a long pavilion of purple silk that had been erected at the end of the
garden, the other children following in strict order of precedence, those who
had the longest names going first.
A procession of noble boys, fantastically dressed as toreadors, came out to
meet her, and the young Count of Tierra-Nueva, a wonderfully handsome lad
of about fourteen years of age, uncovering his head with all the grace of a born
hidalgo and grandee of Spain, led her solemnly in to a little gilt and ivory chair
that was placed on a raised dais above the arena. The children grouped
themselves all round, fluttering their big fans and whispering to each other,
and Don Pedro and the Grand Inquisitor stood laughing at the entrance. Even

the Duchess - the Camerera-Mayor as she was called - a thin, hard-featured
woman with a yellow ruff, did not look quite so bad-tempered as usual, and
something like a chill smile flitted across her wrinkled face and twitched her
thin bloodless lips.
It certainly was a marvellous bull-fight, and much nicer, the Infanta thought,
than the real bull-fight that she had been brought to see at Seville, on the
occasion of the visit of the Duke of Parma to her father. Some of the boys
pranced about on richly-caparisoned hobby-horses brandishing long javelins
with gay streamers of bright ribands attached to them; others went on foot
waving their scarlet cloaks before the bull, and vaulting lightly over the barrier
when he charged them; and as for the bull himself, he was just like a live bull,
though he was only made of wicker-work and stretched hide, and sometimes
insisted on running round the arena on his hind legs, which no live bull ever
dreams of doing. He made a splendid fight of it too, and the children got so
excited that they stood up upon the benches, and waved their lace
handkerchiefs and cried out: Bravo toro! Bravo toro! just as sensibly as if
they had been grown-up people. At last, however, after a prolonged combat,
during which several of the hobby-horses were gored through and through,
and, their riders dismounted, the young Count of Tierra-Nueva brought the
bull to his knees, and having obtained permission from the Infanta to give
the coup de grâce, he plunged his wooden sword into the neck of the animal
with such violence that the head came right off, and disclosed the laughing
face of little Monsieur de Lorraine, the son of the French Ambassador at
Madrid.
The arena was then cleared amidst much applause, and the dead hobbyhorses
dragged solemnly away by two Moorish pages in yellow and black liveries,
and after a short interlude, during which a French posture-master performed
upon the tightrope, some Italian puppets appeared in the semi-classical tragedy
of Sophonisba on the stage of a small theatre that had been built up for the
purpose. They acted so well, and their gestures were so extremely natural, that
at the close of the play the eyes of the Infanta were quite dim with tears.
Indeed some of the children really cried, and had to be comforted with
sweetmeats, and the Grand Inquisitor himself was so affected that he could not
help saying to Don Pedro that it seemed to him intolerable that things made
simply out of wood and coloured wax, and worked mechanically by wires,
should be so unhappy and meet with such terrible misfortunes.
An African juggler followed, who brought in a large flat basket covered with a
red cloth, and having placed it in the centre of the arena, he took from his
turban a curious reed pipe, and blew through it. In a few moments the cloth
began to move, and as the pipe grew shriller and shriller two green and gold
snakes put out their strange wedge-shaped heads and rose slowly up, swaying

to and fro with the music as a plant sways in the water. The children,
however, were rather frightened at their spotted hoods and quick darting
tongues, and were much more pleased when the juggler made a tiny orangetree grow out of the sand and bear pretty white blossoms and clusters of real
fruit; and when he took the fan of the little daughter of the Marquess de LasTorres, and changed it into a blue bird that flew all round the pavilion and
sang, their delight and amazement knew no bounds. The solemn minuet, too,
performed by the dancing boys from the church of Nuestra Senora Del Pilar,
was charming. The Infanta had never before seen this wonderful ceremony
which takes place every year at Maytime in front of the high altar of the
Virgin, and in her honour; and indeed none of the royal family of Spain had
entered the great cathedral of Saragossa since a mad priest, supposed by many
to have been in the pay of Elizabeth of England, had tried to administer a
poisoned wafer to the Prince of the Asturias. So she had known only by
hearsay of ‘Our Lady’s Dance,’ as it was called, and it certainly was a
beautiful sight. The boys wore old-fashioned court dresses of white velvet,
and their curious three-cornered hats were fringed with silver and surmounted
with huge plumes of ostrich feathers, the dazzling whiteness of their costumes,
as they moved about in the sunlight, being still more accentuated by their
swarthy faces and long black hair. Everybody was fascinated by the grave
dignity with which they moved through the intricate figures of the dance, and
by the elaborate grace of their slow gestures, and stately bows, and when they
had finished their performance and doffed their great plumed hats to the
Infanta, she acknowledged their reverence with much courtesy, and made a
vow that she would send a large wax candle to the shrine of Our Lady of Pilar
in return for the pleasure that she had given her.
A troop of handsome Egyptians - as the gipsies were termed in those days then advanced into the arena, and sitting down cross-legs, in a circle, began to
play softly upon their zithers, moving their bodies to the tune, and humming,
almost below their breath, a low dreamy air. When they caught sight of Don
Pedro they scowled at him, and some of them looked terrified, for only a few
weeks before he had had two of their tribe hanged for sorcery in the marketplace at Seville, but the pretty Infanta charmed them as she leaned back
peeping over her fan with her great blue eyes, and they felt sure that one so
lovely as she was could never be cruel to anybody. So they played on very
gently and just touching the cords of the zithers with their long pointed nails,
and their heads began to nod as though they were falling asleep. Suddenly,
with a cry so shrill that all the children were startled and Don Pedro’s hand
clutched at the agate pommel of his dagger, they leapt to their feet and whirled
madly round the enclosure beating their tambourines, and chaunting some
wild love-song in their strange guttural language. Then at another signal they
all flung themselves again to the ground and lay there quite still, the dull

strumming of the zithers being the only sound that broke the silence. After
that they had done this several times, they disappeared for a moment and came
back leading a brown shaggy bear by a chain, and carrying on their shoulders
some little Barbary apes. The bear stood upon his head with the utmost
gravity, and the wizened apes played all kinds of amusing tricks with two
gipsy boys who seemed to be their masters, and fought with tiny swords, and
fired off guns, and went through a regular soldier’s drill just like the King’s
own bodyguard. In fact the gipsies were a great success.
But the funniest part of the whole morning’s entertainment, was undoubtedly
the dancing of the little Dwarf. When he stumbled into the arena, waddling on
his crooked legs and wagging his huge misshapen head from side to side, the
children went off into a loud shout of delight, and the Infanta herself laughed
so much that the Camerera was obliged to remind her that although there were
many precedents in Spain for a King’s daughter weeping before her equals,
there were none for a Princess of the blood royal making so merry before
those who were her inferiors in birth. The Dwarf, however, was really quite
irresistible, and even at the Spanish Court, always noted for its cultivated
passion for the horrible, so fantastic a little monster had never been seen. It
was his first appearance, too. He had been discovered only the day before,
running wild through the forest, by two of the nobles who happened to have
been hunting in a remote part of the great cork-wood that surrounded the town,
and had been carried off by them to the Palace as a surprise for the Infanta; his
father, who was a poor charcoal-burner, being but too well pleased to get rid of
so ugly and useless a child. Perhaps the most amusing thing about him was
his complete unconsciousness of his own grotesque appearance. Indeed he
seemed quite happy and full of the highest spirits. When the children laughed,
he laughed as freely and as joyously as any of them, and at the close of each
dance he made them each the funniest of bows, smiling and nodding at them
just as if he was really one of themselves, and not a little misshapen thing that
Nature, in some humourous mood, had fashioned for others to mock at. As for
the Infanta, she absolutely fascinated him. He could not keep his eyes off her,
and seemed to dance for her alone, and when at the close of the performance,
remembering how she had seen the great ladies of the Court throw bouquets to
Caffarelli, the famous Italian treble, whom the Pope had sent from his own
chapel to Madrid that he might cure the King’s melancholy by the sweetness
of his voice, she took out of her hair the beautiful white rose, and partly for a
jest and partly to tease the Camerera, threw it to him across the arena with her
sweetest smile, he took the whole matter quite seriously, and pressing the
flower to his rough coarse lips he put his hand upon his heart, and sank on one
knee before her, grinning from ear to ear, and with his little bright eyes
sparkling with pleasure.

This so upset the gravity of the Infanta that she kept on laughing long after the
little Dwarf had ran out of the arena, and expressed a desire to her uncle that
the dance should be immediately repeated. The Camerera, however, on the
plea that the sun was too hot, decided that it would be better that her Highness
should return without delay to the Palace, where a wonderful feast had been
already prepared for her, including a real birthday cake with her own initials
worked all over it in painted sugar and a lovely silver flag waving from the
top. The Infanta accordingly rose up with much dignity, and having given
orders that the little dwarf was to dance again for her after the hour of siesta,
and conveyed her thanks to the young Count of Tierra-Nueva for his charming
reception, she went back to her apartments, the children following in the same
order in which they had entered.
Now when the little Dwarf heard that he was to dance a second time before the
Infanta, and by her own express command, he was so proud that he ran out
into the garden, kissing the white rose in an absurd ecstasy of pleasure, and
making the most uncouth and clumsy gestures of delight.
The Flowers were quite indignant at his daring to intrude into their beautiful
home, and when they saw him capering up and down the walks, and waving
his arms above his head in such a ridiculous manner, they could not restrain
their feelings any longer.
‘He is really far too ugly to be allowed to play in any place where we are,’
cried the Tulips.
‘He should drink poppy-juice, and go to sleep for a thousand years,’ said the
great scarlet Lilies, and they grew quite hot and angry.
‘He is a perfect horror!’ screamed the Cactus. ‘Why, he is twisted and stumpy,
and his head is completely out of proportion with his legs. Really he makes
me feel prickly all over, and if he comes near me I will sting him with my
thorns.’
‘And he has actually got one of my best blooms,’ exclaimed the White RoseTree. ‘I gave it to the Infanta this morning myself, as a birthday present, and
he has stolen it from her.’ And she called out: ‘Thief, thief, thief!’ at the top of
her voice.
Even the red Geraniums, who did not usually give themselves airs, and were
known to have a great many poor relations themselves, curled up in disgust
when they saw him, and when the Violets meekly remarked that though he
was certainly extremely plain, still he could not help it, they retorted with a
good deal of justice that that was his chief defect, and that there was no reason
why one should admire a person because he was incurable; and, indeed, some

of the Violets themselves felt that the ugliness of the little Dwarf was almost
ostentatious, and that he would have shown much better taste if he had looked
sad, or at least pensive, instead of jumping about merrily, and throwing
himself into such grotesque and silly attitudes.
As for the old Sundial, who was an extremely remarkable individual, and had
once told the time of day to no less a person than the Emperor Charles V.
himself, he was so taken aback by the little Dwarf’s appearance, that he almost
forgot to mark two whole minutes with his long shadowy finger, and could not
help saying to the great milk-white Peacock, who was sunning herself on the
balustrade, that every one knew that the children of Kings were Kings, and
that the children of charcoal-burners were charcoal-burners, and that it was
absurd to pretend that it wasn’t so; a statement with which the Peacock
entirely agreed, and indeed screamed out, ‘Certainly, certainly,’ in such a loud,
harsh voice, that the gold-fish who lived in the basin of the cool splashing
fountain put their heads out of the water, and asked the huge stone Tritons
what on earth was the matter.
But somehow the Birds liked him. They had seen him often in the forest,
dancing about like an elf after the eddying leaves, or crouched up in the
hollow of some old oak-tree, sharing his nuts with the squirrels. They did not
mind his being ugly, a bit. Why, even the nightingale herself, who sang so
sweetly in the orange groves at night that sometimes the Moon leaned down to
listen, was not much to look at after all; and, besides, he had been kind to
them, and during that terribly bitter winter, when there were no berries on the
trees, and the ground was as hard as iron, and the wolves had come down to
the very gates of the city to look for food, he had never once forgotten them,
but had always given them crumbs out of his little hunch of black bread, and
divided with them whatever poor breakfast he had.
So they flew round and round him, just touching his cheek with their wings as
they passed, and chattered to each other, and the little Dwarf was so pleased
that he could not help showing them the beautiful white rose, and telling them
that the Infanta herself had given it to him because she loved him.
They did not understand a single word of what he was saying, but that made
no matter, for they put their heads on one side, and looked wise, which is quite
as good as understanding a thing, and very much easier.
The Lizards also took an immense fancy to him, and when he grew tired of
running about and flung himself down on the grass to rest, they played and
romped all over him, and tried to amuse him in the best way they could.
‘Every one cannot be as beautiful as a lizard,’ they cried; ‘that would be too
much to expect. And, though it sounds absurd to say so, he is really not so
ugly after all, provided, of course, that one shuts one’s eyes, and does not look

at him.’ The Lizards were extremely philosophical by nature, and often sat
thinking for hours and hours together, when there was nothing else to do, or
when the weather was too rainy for them to go out.
The Flowers, however, were excessively annoyed at their behaviour, and at the
behaviour of the birds. ‘It only shows,’ they said, ‘what a vulgarising effect
this incessant rushing and flying about has. Well-bred people always stay
exactly in the same place, as we do. No one ever saw us hopping up and down
the walks, or galloping madly through the grass after dragon-flies. When we
do want change of air, we send for the gardener, and he carries us to another
bed. This is dignified, and as it should be. But birds and lizards have no sense
of repose, and indeed birds have not even a permanent address. They are mere
vagrants like the gipsies, and should be treated in exactly the same manner.’
So they put their noses in the air, and looked very haughty, and were quite
delighted when after some time they saw the little Dwarf scramble up from the
grass, and make his way across the terrace to the palace.
‘He should certainly be kept indoors for the rest of his natural life,’ they said.
‘Look at his hunched back, and his crooked legs,’ and they began to titter.
But the little Dwarf knew nothing of all this. He liked the birds and the lizards
immensely, and thought that the flowers were the most marvellous things in
the whole world, except of course the Infanta, but then she had given him the
beautiful white rose, and she loved him, and that made a great difference.
How he wished that he had gone back with her! She would have put him on
her right hand, and smiled at him, and he would have never left her side, but
would have made her his playmate, and taught her all kinds of delightful
tricks. For though he had never been in a palace before, he knew a great many
wonderful things. He could make little cages out of rushes for the
grasshoppers to sing in, and fashion the long jointed bamboo into the pipe that
Pan loves to hear. He knew the cry of every bird, and could call the starlings
from the tree-top, or the heron from the mere. He knew the trail of every
animal, and could track the hare by its delicate footprints, and the boar by the
trampled leaves. All the wild-dances he knew, the mad dance in red raiment
with the autumn, the light dance in blue sandals over the corn, the dance with
white snow-wreaths in winter, and the blossom-dance through the orchards in
spring. He knew where the wood-pigeons built their nests, and once when a
fowler had snared the parent birds, he had brought up the young ones himself,
and had built a little dovecot for them in the cleft of a pollard elm. They were
quite tame, and used to feed out of his hands every morning. She would like
them, and the rabbits that scurried about in the long fern, and the jays with
their steely feathers and black bills, and the hedgehogs that could curl
themselves up into prickly balls, and the great wise tortoises that crawled
slowly about, shaking their heads and nibbling at the young leaves. Yes, she

must certainly come to the forest and play with him. He would give her his
own little bed, and would watch outside the window till dawn, to see that the
wild horned cattle did not harm her, nor the gaunt wolves creep too near the
hut. And at dawn he would tap at the shutters and wake her, and they would
go out and dance together all the day long. It was really not a bit lonely in the
forest. Sometimes a Bishop rode through on his white mule, reading out of a
painted book. Sometimes in their green velvet caps, and their jerkins of
tanned deerskin, the falconers passed by, with hooded hawks on their wrists.
At vintage-time came the grape-treaders, with purple hands and feet, wreathed
with glossy ivy and carrying dripping skins of wine; and the charcoal-burners
sat round their huge braziers at night, watching the dry logs charring slowly in
the fire, and roasting chestnuts in the ashes, and the robbers came out of their
caves and made merry with them. Once, too, he had seen a beautiful
procession winding up the long dusty road to Toledo. The monks went in
front singing sweetly, and carrying bright banners and crosses of gold, and
then, in silver armour, with matchlocks and pikes, came the soldiers, and in
their midst walked three barefooted men, in strange yellow dresses painted all
over with wonderful figures, and carrying lighted candles in their hands.
Certainly there was a great deal to look at in the forest, and when she was tired
he would find a soft bank of moss for her, or carry her in his arms, for he was
very strong, though he knew that he was not tall. He would make her a
necklace of red bryony berries, that would be quite as pretty as the white
berries that she wore on her dress, and when she was tired of them, she could
throw them away, and he would find her others. He would bring her acorncups and dew-drenched anemones, and tiny glow-worms to be stars in the pale
gold of her hair.
But where was she? He asked the white rose, and it made him no answer. The
whole palace seemed asleep, and even where the shutters had not been closed,
heavy curtains had been drawn across the windows to keep out the glare. He
wandered all round looking for some place through which he might gain an
entrance, and at last he caught sight of a little private door that was lying
open. He slipped through, and found himself in a splendid hall, far more
splendid, he feared, than the forest, there was so much more gilding
everywhere, and even the floor was made of great coloured stones, fitted
together into a sort of geometrical pattern. But the little Infanta was not there,
only some wonderful white statues that looked down on him from their jasper
pedestals, with sad blank eyes and strangely smiling lips.
At the end of the hall hung a richly embroidered curtain of black velvet,
powdered with suns and stars, the King’s favourite devices, and broidered on
the colour he loved best. Perhaps she was hiding behind that? He would try at
any rate.

So he stole quietly across, and drew it aside. No; there was only another
room, though a prettier room, he thought, than the one he had just left. The
walls were hung with a many-figured green arras of needle-wrought tapestry
representing a hunt, the work of some Flemish artists who had spent more than
seven years in its composition. It had once been the chamber of Jean le Fou,
as he was called, that mad King who was so enamoured of the chase, that he
had often tried in his delirium to mount the huge rearing horses, and to drag
down the stag on which the great hounds were leaping, sounding his hunting
horn, and stabbing with his dagger at the pale flying deer. It was now used as
the council-room, and on the centre table were lying the red portfolios of the
ministers, stamped with the gold tulips of Spain, and with the arms and
emblems of the house of Hapsburg.
The little Dwarf looked in wonder all round him, and was half-afraid to go on.
The strange silent horsemen that galloped so swiftly through the long glades
without making any noise, seemed to him like those terrible phantoms of
whom he had heard the charcoal-burners speaking - the Comprachos, who
hunt only at night, and if they meet a man, turn him into a hind, and chase
him. But he thought of the pretty Infanta, and took courage. He wanted to
find her alone, and to tell her that he too loved her. Perhaps she was in the
room beyond.
He ran across the soft Moorish carpets, and opened the door. No! She was not
here either. The room was quite empty.
It was a throne-room, used for the reception of foreign ambassadors, when the
King, which of late had not been often, consented to give them a personal
audience; the same room in which, many years before, envoys had appeared
from England to make arrangements for the marriage of their Queen, then one
of the Catholic sovereigns of Europe, with the Emperor’s eldest son. The
hangings were of gilt Cordovan leather, and a heavy gilt chandelier with
branches for three hundred wax lights hung down from the black and white
ceiling. Underneath a great canopy of gold cloth, on which the lions and
towers of Castile were broidered in seed pearls, stood the throne itself, covered
with a rich pall of black velvet studded with silver tulips and elaborately
fringed with silver and pearls. On the second step of the throne was placed the
kneeling-stool of the Infanta, with its cushion of cloth of silver tissue, and
below that again, and beyond the limit of the canopy, stood the chair for the
Papal Nuncio, who alone had the right to be seated in the King’s presence on
the occasion of any public ceremonial, and whose Cardinal’s hat, with its
tangled scarlet tassels, lay on a purple tabouret in front. On the wall, facing
the throne, hung a life-sized portrait of Charles V. in hunting dress, with a
great mastiff by his side, and a picture of Philip II. receiving the homage of the
Netherlands occupied the centre of the other wall. Between the windows

stood a black ebony cabinet, inlaid with plates of ivory, on which the figures
from Holbein’s Dance of Death had been graved - by the hand, some said, of
that famous master himself.
But the little Dwarf cared nothing for all this magnificence. He would not
have given his rose for all the pearls on the canopy, nor one white petal of his
rose for the throne itself. What he wanted was to see the Infanta before she
went down to the pavilion, and to ask her to come away with him when he had
finished his dance. Here, in the Palace, the air was close and heavy, but in the
forest the wind blew free, and the sunlight with wandering hands of gold
moved the tremulous leaves aside. There were flowers, too, in the forest, not
so splendid, perhaps, as the flowers in the garden, but more sweetly scented
for all that; hyacinths in early spring that flooded with waving purple the cool
glens, and grassy knolls; yellow primroses that nestled in little clumps round
the gnarled roots of the oak-trees; bright celandine, and blue speedwell, and
irises lilac and gold. There were grey catkins on the hazels, and the foxgloves
drooped with the weight of their dappled bee-haunted cells. The chestnut had
its spires of white stars, and the hawthorn its pallid moons of beauty. Yes:
surely she would come if he could only find her! She would come with him to
the fair forest, and all day long he would dance for her delight. A smile lit up
his eyes at the thought, and he passed into the next room.
Of all the rooms this was the brightest and the most beautiful. The walls were
covered with a pink-flowered Lucca damask, patterned with birds and dotted
with dainty blossoms of silver; the furniture was of massive silver, festooned
with florid wreaths, and swinging Cupids; in front of the two large fire-places
stood great screens broidered with parrots and peacocks, and the floor, which
was of sea-green onyx, seemed to stretch far away into the distance. Nor was
he alone. Standing under the shadow of the doorway, at the extreme end of
the room, he saw a little figure watching him. His heart trembled, a cry of joy
broke from his lips, and he moved out into the sunlight. As he did so, the
figure moved out also, and he saw it plainly.
The Infanta! It was a monster, the most grotesque monster he had ever
beheld. Not properly shaped, as all other people were, but hunchbacked, and
crooked-limbed, with huge lolling head and mane of black hair. The little
Dwarf frowned, and the monster frowned also. He laughed, and it laughed
with him, and held its hands to its sides, just as he himself was doing. He
made it a mocking bow, and it returned him a low reverence. He went towards
it, and it came to meet him, copying each step that he made, and stopping
when he stopped himself. He shouted with amusement, and ran forward, and
reached out his hand, and the hand of the monster touched his, and it was as
cold as ice. He grew afraid, and moved his hand across, and the monster’s
hand followed it quickly. He tried to press on, but something smooth and hard

stopped him. The face of the monster was now close to his own, and seemed
full of terror. He brushed his hair off his eyes. It imitated him. He struck at it,
and it returned blow for blow. He loathed it, and it made hideous faces at
him. He drew back, and it retreated.
What is it? He thought for a moment, and looked round at the rest of the
room. It was strange, but everything seemed to have its double in this
invisible wall of clear water. Yes, picture for picture was repeated, and couch
for couch. The sleeping Faun that lay in the alcove by the doorway had its
twin brother that slumbered, and the silver Venus that stood in the sunlight
held out her arms to a Venus as lovely as herself.
Was it Echo? He had called to her once in the valley, and she had answered
him word for word. Could she mock the eye, as she mocked the voice? Could
she make a mimic world just like the real world? Could the shadows of things
have colour and life and movement? Could it be that - ?
He started, and taking from his breast the beautiful white rose, he turned
round, and kissed it. The monster had a rose of its own, petal for petal the
same! It kissed it with like kisses, and pressed it to its heart with horrible
gestures.
When the truth dawned upon him, he gave a wild cry of despair, and fell
sobbing to the ground. So it was he who was misshapen and hunchbacked,
foul to look at and grotesque. He himself was the monster, and it was at him
that all the children had been laughing, and the little Princess who he had
thought loved him - she too had been merely mocking at his ugliness, and
making merry over his twisted limbs. Why had they not left him in the forest,
where there was no mirror to tell him how loathsome he was? Why had his
father not killed him, rather than sell him to his shame? The hot tears poured
down his cheeks, and he tore the white rose to pieces. The sprawling monster
did the same, and scattered the faint petals in the air. It grovelled on the
ground, and, when he looked at it, it watched him with a face drawn with
pain. He crept away, lest he should see it, and covered his eyes with his
hands. He crawled, like some wounded thing, into the shadow, and lay there
moaning.
And at that moment the Infanta herself came in with her companions through
the open window, and when they saw the ugly little dwarf lying on the ground
and beating the floor with his clenched hands, in the most fantastic and
exaggerated manner, they went off into shouts of happy laughter, and stood all
round him and watched him.
‘His dancing was funny,’ said the Infanta; ‘but his acting is funnier still.
Indeed he is almost as good as the puppets, only of course not quite so

natural.’ And she fluttered her big fan, and applauded.
But the little Dwarf never looked up, and his sobs grew fainter and fainter, and
suddenly he gave a curious gasp, and clutched his side. And then he fell back
again, and lay quite still.
‘That is capital,’ said the Infanta, after a pause; ‘but now you must dance for
me.’
‘Yes,’ cried all the children, ‘you must get up and dance, for you are as clever
as the Barbary apes, and much more ridiculous.’ But the little Dwarf made no
answer.
And the Infanta stamped her foot, and called out to her uncle, who was
walking on the terrace with the Chamberlain, reading some despatches that
had just arrived from Mexico, where the Holy Office had recently been
established. ‘My funny little dwarf is sulking,’ she cried, ‘you must wake him
up, and tell him to dance for me.’
They smiled at each other, and sauntered in, and Don Pedro stooped down,
and slapped the Dwarf on the cheek with his embroidered glove. ‘You must
dance,’ he said, ‘petit monsire. You must dance. The Infanta of Spain and the
Indies wishes to be amused.’
But the little Dwarf never moved.
‘A whipping master should be sent for,’ said Don Pedro wearily, and he went
back to the terrace. But the Chamberlain looked grave, and he knelt beside the
little dwarf, and put his hand upon his heart. And after a few moments he
shrugged his shoulders, and rose up, and having made a low bow to the
Infanta, he said ‘Mi bella Princesa, your funny little dwarf will never dance again. It is a pity,
for he is so ugly that he might have made the King smile.’
‘But why will he not dance again?’ asked the Infanta, laughing.
‘Because his heart is broken,’ answered the Chamberlain.
And the Infanta frowned, and her dainty rose-leaf lips curled in pretty disdain.
‘For the future let those who come to play with me have no hearts,’ she cried,
and she ran out into the garden.

THE FISHERMAN AND HIS SOUL
[TO H.S.H. ALICE, PRINCESS OF MONACO]

Every evening the young Fisherman went out upon the sea, and threw his nets
into the water.
When the wind blew from the land he caught nothing, or but little at best, for it
was a bitter and black-winged wind, and rough waves rose up to meet it. But
when the wind blew to the shore, the fish came in from the deep, and swam
into the meshes of his nets, and he took them to the market-place and sold
them.
Every evening he went out upon the sea, and one evening the net was so heavy
that hardly could he draw it into the boat. And he laughed, and said to
himself, ‘Surely I have caught all the fish that swim, or snared some dull
monster that will be a marvel to men, or some thing of horror that the great
Queen will desire,’ and putting forth all his strength, he tugged at the coarse
ropes till, like lines of blue enamel round a vase of bronze, the long veins rose
up on his arms. He tugged at the thin ropes, and nearer and nearer came the
circle of flat corks, and the net rose at last to the top of the water.
But no fish at all was in it, nor any monster or thing of horror, but only a little
Mermaid lying fast asleep.
Her hair was as a wet fleece of gold, and each separate hair as a thread of fine
gold in a cup of glass. Her body was as white ivory, and her tail was of silver
and pearl. Silver and pearl was her tail, and the green weeds of the sea coiled
round it; and like sea-shells were her ears, and her lips were like sea-coral.
The cold waves dashed over her cold breasts, and the salt glistened upon her
eyelids.
So beautiful was she that when the young Fisherman saw her he was filled
with wonder, and he put out his hand and drew the net close to him, and
leaning over the side he clasped her in his arms. And when he touched her,
she gave a cry like a startled sea-gull, and woke, and looked at him in terror
with her mauve-amethyst eyes, and struggled that she might escape. But he
held her tightly to him, and would not suffer her to depart.
And when she saw that she could in no way escape from him, she began to
weep, and said, ‘I pray thee let me go, for I am the only daughter of a King,
and my father is aged and alone.’
But the young Fisherman answered, ‘I will not let thee go save thou makest
me a promise that whenever I call thee, thou wilt come and sing to me, for the
fish delight to listen to the song of the Sea-folk, and so shall my nets be full.’
‘Wilt thou in very truth let me go, if I promise thee this?’ cried the Mermaid.
‘In very truth I will let thee go,’ said the young Fisherman.

So she made him the promise he desired, and sware it by the oath of the Seafolk. And he loosened his arms from about her, and she sank down into the
water, trembling with a strange fear.
Every evening the young Fisherman went out upon the sea, and called to the
Mermaid, and she rose out of the water and sang to him. Round and round her
swam the dolphins, and the wild gulls wheeled above her head.
And she sang a marvellous song. For she sang of the Sea-folk who drive their
flocks from cave to cave, and carry the little calves on their shoulders; of the
Tritons who have long green beards, and hairy breasts, and blow through
twisted conchs when the King passes by; of the palace of the King which is all
of amber, with a roof of clear emerald, and a pavement of bright pearl; and of
the gardens of the sea where the great filigrane fans of coral wave all day long,
and the fish dart about like silver birds, and the anemones cling to the rocks,
and the pinks bourgeon in the ribbed yellow sand. She sang of the big whales
that come down from the north seas and have sharp icicles hanging to their
fins; of the Sirens who tell of such wonderful things that the merchants have to
stop their ears with wax lest they should hear them, and leap into the water and
be drowned; of the sunken galleys with their tall masts, and the frozen sailors
clinging to the rigging, and the mackerel swimming in and out of the open
portholes; of the little barnacles who are great travellers, and cling to the keels
of the ships and go round and round the world; and of the cuttlefish who live
in the sides of the cliffs and stretch out their long black arms, and can make
night come when they will it. She sang of the nautilus who has a boat of her
own that is carved out of an opal and steered with a silken sail; of the happy
Mermen who play upon harps and can charm the great Kraken to sleep; of the
little children who catch hold of the slippery porpoises and ride laughing upon
their backs; of the Mermaids who lie in the white foam and hold out their arms
to the mariners; and of the sea-lions with their curved tusks, and the sea-horses
with their floating manes.
And as she sang, all the tunny-fish came in from the deep to listen to her, and
the young Fisherman threw his nets round them and caught them, and others
he took with a spear. And when his boat was well-laden, the Mermaid would
sink down into the sea, smiling at him.
Yet would she never come near him that he might touch her. Oftentimes he
called to her and prayed of her, but she would not; and when he sought to seize
her she dived into the water as a seal might dive, nor did he see her again that
day. And each day the sound of her voice became sweeter to his ears. So
sweet was her voice that he forgot his nets and his cunning, and had no care of
his craft. Vermilion-finned and with eyes of bossy gold, the tunnies went by in

shoals, but he heeded them not. His spear lay by his side unused, and his
baskets of plaited osier were empty. With lips parted, and eyes dim with
wonder, he sat idle in his boat and listened, listening till the sea-mists crept
round him, and the wandering moon stained his brown limbs with silver.
And one evening he called to her, and said: ‘Little Mermaid, little Mermaid, I
love thee. Take me for thy bridegroom, for I love thee.’
But the Mermaid shook her head. ‘Thou hast a human soul,’ she answered.
‘If only thou wouldst send away thy soul, then could I love thee.’
And the young Fisherman said to himself, ‘Of what use is my soul to me? I
cannot see it. I may not touch it. I do not know it. Surely I will send it away
from me, and much gladness shall be mine.’ And a cry of joy broke from his
lips, and standing up in the painted boat, he held out his arms to the Mermaid.
‘I will send my soul away,’ he cried, ‘and you shall be my bride, and I will be
thy bridegroom, and in the depth of the sea we will dwell together, and all that
thou hast sung of thou shalt show me, and all that thou desirest I will do, nor
shall our lives be divided.’
And the little Mermaid laughed for pleasure and hid her face in her hands.
‘But how shall I send my soul from me?’ cried the young Fisherman. ‘Tell me
how I may do it, and lo! it shall be done.’
‘Alas! I know not,’ said the little Mermaid: ‘the Sea-folk have no souls.’ And
she sank down into the deep, looking wistfully at him.
Now early on the next morning, before the sun was the span of a man’s hand
above the hill, the young Fisherman went to the house of the Priest and
knocked three times at the door.
The novice looked out through the wicket, and when he saw who it was, he
drew back the latch and said to him, ‘Enter.’
And the young Fisherman passed in, and knelt down on the sweet-smelling
rushes of the floor, and cried to the Priest who was reading out of the Holy
Book and said to him, ‘Father, I am in love with one of the Sea-folk, and my
soul hindereth me from having my desire. Tell me how I can send my soul
away from me, for in truth I have no need of it. Of what value is my soul to
me? I cannot see it. I may not touch it. I do not know it.’
And the Priest beat his breast, and answered, ‘Alack, alack, thou art mad, or
hast eaten of some poisonous herb, for the soul is the noblest part of man, and
was given to us by God that we should nobly use it. There is no thing more
precious than a human soul, nor any earthly thing that can be weighed with it.

It is worth all the gold that is in the world, and is more precious than the rubies
of the kings. Therefore, my son, think not any more of this matter, for it is a
sin that may not be forgiven. And as for the Sea-folk, they are lost, and they
who would traffic with them are lost also. They are as the beasts of the field
that know not good from evil, and for them the Lord has not died.’
The young Fisherman’s eyes filled with tears when he heard the bitter words
of the Priest, and he rose up from his knees and said to him, ‘Father, the Fauns
live in the forest and are glad, and on the rocks sit the Mermen with their harps
of red gold. Let me be as they are, I beseech thee, for their days are as the
days of flowers. And as for my soul, what doth my soul profit me, if it stand
between me and the thing that I love?’
‘The love of the body is vile,’ cried the Priest, knitting his brows, ‘and vile and
evil are the pagan things God suffers to wander through His world. Accursed
be the Fauns of the woodland, and accursed be the singers of the sea! I have
heard them at night-time, and they have sought to lure me from my beads.
They tap at the window, and laugh. They whisper into my ears the tale of their
perilous joys. They tempt me with temptations, and when I would pray they
make mouths at me. They are lost, I tell thee, they are lost. For them there is
no heaven nor hell, and in neither shall they praise God’s name.’
‘Father,’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘thou knowest not what thou sayest.
Once in my net I snared the daughter of a King. She is fairer than the morning
star, and whiter than the moon. For her body I would give my soul, and for
her love I would surrender heaven. Tell me what I ask of thee, and let me go
in peace.’
‘Away! Away!’ cried the Priest: ‘thy leman is lost, and thou shalt be lost with
her.’
And he gave him no blessing, but drove him from his door.
And the young Fisherman went down into the market-place, and he walked
slowly, and with bowed head, as one who is in sorrow.
And when the merchants saw him coming, they began to whisper to each
other, and one of them came forth to meet him, and called him by name, and
said to him, ‘What hast thou to sell?’
‘I will sell thee my soul,’ he answered. ‘I pray thee buy it of me, for I am
weary of it. Of what use is my soul to me? I cannot see it. I may not touch
it. I do not know it.’
But the merchants mocked at him, and said, ‘Of what use is a man’s soul to
us? It is not worth a clipped piece of silver. Sell us thy body for a slave, and
we will clothe thee in sea-purple, and put a ring upon thy finger, and make

thee the minion of the great Queen. But talk not of the soul, for to us it is
nought, nor has it any value for our service.’
And the young Fisherman said to himself: ‘How strange a thing this is! The
Priest telleth me that the soul is worth all the gold in the world, and the
merchants say that it is not worth a clipped piece of silver.’ And he passed out
of the market-place, and went down to the shore of the sea, and began to
ponder on what he should do.
And at noon he remembered how one of his companions, who was a gatherer
of samphire, had told him of a certain young Witch who dwelt in a cave at the
head of the bay and was very cunning in her witcheries. And he set to and ran,
so eager was he to get rid of his soul, and a cloud of dust followed him as he
sped round the sand of the shore. By the itching of her palm the young Witch
knew his coming, and she laughed and let down her red hair. With her red hair
falling around her, she stood at the opening of the cave, and in her hand she
had a spray of wild hemlock that was blossoming.
‘What d’ye lack? What d’ye lack?’ she cried, as he came panting up the steep,
and bent down before her. ‘Fish for thy net, when the wind is foul? I have a
little reed-pipe, and when I blow on it the mullet come sailing into the bay.
But it has a price, pretty boy, it has a price. What d’ye lack? What d’ye lack?
A storm to wreck the ships, and wash the chests of rich treasure ashore? I
have more storms than the wind has, for I serve one who is stronger than the
wind, and with a sieve and a pail of water I can send the great galleys to the
bottom of the sea. But I have a price, pretty boy, I have a price. What d’ye
lack? What d’ye lack? I know a flower that grows in the valley, none knows
it but I. It has purple leaves, and a star in its heart, and its juice is as white as
milk. Shouldst thou touch with this flower the hard lips of the Queen, she
would follow thee all over the world. Out of the bed of the King she would
rise, and over the whole world she would follow thee. And it has a price,
pretty boy, it has a price. What d’ye lack? What d’ye lack? I can pound a
toad in a mortar, and make broth of it, and stir the broth with a dead man’s
hand. Sprinkle it on thine enemy while he sleeps, and he will turn into a black
viper, and his own mother will slay him. With a wheel I can draw the Moon
from heaven, and in a crystal I can show thee Death. What d’ye lack? What
d’ye lack? Tell me thy desire, and I will give it thee, and thou shalt pay me a
price, pretty boy, thou shalt pay me a price.’
‘My desire is but for a little thing,’ said the young Fisherman, ‘yet hath the
Priest been wroth with me, and driven me forth. It is but for a little thing, and
the merchants have mocked at me, and denied me. Therefore am I come to
thee, though men call thee evil, and whatever be thy price I shall pay it.’

‘What wouldst thou?’ asked the Witch, coming near to him.
‘I would send my soul away from me,’ answered the young Fisherman.
The Witch grew pale, and shuddered, and hid her face in her blue mantle.
‘Pretty boy, pretty boy,’ she muttered, ‘that is a terrible thing to do.’
He tossed his brown curls and laughed. ‘My soul is nought to me,’ he
answered. ‘I cannot see it. I may not touch it. I do not know it.’
‘What wilt thou give me if I tell thee?’ asked the Witch, looking down at him
with her beautiful eyes.
‘Five pieces of gold,’ he said, ‘and my nets, and the wattled house where I
live, and the painted boat in which I sail. Only tell me how to get rid of my
soul, and I will give thee all that I possess.’
She laughed mockingly at him, and struck him with the spray of hemlock. ‘I
can turn the autumn leaves into gold,’ she answered, ‘and I can weave the pale
moonbeams into silver if I will it. He whom I serve is richer than all the kings
of this world, and has their dominions.’
‘What then shall I give thee,’ he cried, ‘if thy price be neither gold nor silver?’
The Witch stroked his hair with her thin white hand. ‘Thou must dance with
me, pretty boy,’ she murmured, and she smiled at him as she spoke.
‘Nought but that?’ cried the young Fisherman in wonder and he rose to his
feet.
‘Nought but that,’ she answered, and she smiled at him again.
‘Then at sunset in some secret place we shall dance together,’ he said, ‘and
after that we have danced thou shalt tell me the thing which I desire to know.’
She shook her head. ‘When the moon is full, when the moon is full,’ she
muttered. Then she peered all round, and listened. A blue bird rose screaming
from its nest and circled over the dunes, and three spotted birds rustled
through the coarse grey grass and whistled to each other. There was no other
sound save the sound of a wave fretting the smooth pebbles below. So she
reached out her hand, and drew him near to her and put her dry lips close to
his ear.
‘To-night thou must come to the top of the mountain,’ she whispered. ‘It is a
Sabbath, and He will be there.’
The young Fisherman started and looked at her, and she showed her white
teeth and laughed. ‘Who is He of whom thou speakest?’ he asked.
‘It matters not,’ she answered.

‘Go thou to-night, and stand under the

branches of the hornbeam, and wait for my coming. If a black dog run
towards thee, strike it with a rod of willow, and it will go away. If an owl
speak to thee, make it no answer. When the moon is full I shall be with thee,
and we will dance together on the grass.’
‘But wilt thou swear to me to tell me how I may send my soul from me?’ he
made question.
She moved out into the sunlight, and through her red hair rippled the wind.
‘By the hoofs of the goat I swear it,’ she made answer.
‘Thou art the best of the witches,’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘and I will
surely dance with thee to-night on the top of the mountain. I would indeed
that thou hadst asked of me either gold or silver. But such as thy price is thou
shalt have it, for it is but a little thing.’ And he doffed his cap to her, and bent
his head low, and ran back to the town filled with a great joy.
And the Witch watched him as he went, and when he had passed from her
sight she entered her cave, and having taken a mirror from a box of carved
cedarwood, she set it up on a frame, and burned vervain on lighted charcoal
before it, and peered through the coils of the smoke. And after a time she
clenched her hands in anger. ‘He should have been mine,’ she muttered, ‘I am
as fair as she is.’
And that evening, when the moon had risen, the young Fisherman climbed up
to the top of the mountain, and stood under the branches of the hornbeam.
Like a targe of polished metal the round sea lay at his feet, and the shadows of
the fishing-boats moved in the little bay. A great owl, with yellow sulphurous
eyes, called to him by his name, but he made it no answer. A black dog ran
towards him and snarled. He struck it with a rod of willow, and it went away
whining.
At midnight the witches came flying through the air like bats. ‘Phew!’ they
cried, as they lit upon the ground, ‘there is some one here we know not!’ and
they sniffed about, and chattered to each other, and made signs. Last of all
came the young Witch, with her red hair streaming in the wind. She wore a
dress of gold tissue embroidered with peacocks’ eyes, and a little cap of green
velvet was on her head.
‘Where is he, where is he?’ shrieked the witches when they saw her, but she
only laughed, and ran to the hornbeam, and taking the Fisherman by the hand
she led him out into the moonlight and began to dance.
Round and round they whirled, and the young Witch jumped so high that he
could see the scarlet heels of her shoes. Then right across the dancers came

the sound of the galloping of a horse, but no horse was to be seen, and he felt
afraid.
‘Faster,’ cried the Witch, and she threw her arms about his neck, and her
breath was hot upon his face. ‘Faster, faster!’ she cried, and the earth seemed
to spin beneath his feet, and his brain grew troubled, and a great terror fell on
him, as of some evil thing that was watching him, and at last he became aware
that under the shadow of a rock there was a figure that had not been there
before.
It was a man dressed in a suit of black velvet, cut in the Spanish fashion. His
face was strangely pale, but his lips were like a proud red flower. He seemed
weary, and was leaning back toying in a listless manner with the pommel of
his dagger. On the grass beside him lay a plumed hat, and a pair of ridinggloves gauntleted with gilt lace, and sewn with seed-pearls wrought into a
curious device. A short cloak lined with sables hang from his shoulder, and
his delicate white hands were gemmed with rings. Heavy eyelids drooped
over his eyes.
The young Fisherman watched him, as one snared in a spell. At last their eyes
met, and wherever he danced it seemed to him that the eyes of the man were
upon him. He heard the Witch laugh, and caught her by the waist, and whirled
her madly round and round.
Suddenly a dog bayed in the wood, and the dancers stopped, and going up two
by two, knelt down, and kissed the man’s hands. As they did so, a little smile
touched his proud lips, as a bird’s wing touches the water and makes it laugh.
But there was disdain in it. He kept looking at the young Fisherman.
‘Come! let us worship,’ whispered the Witch, and she led him up, and a great
desire to do as she besought him seized on him, and he followed her. But
when he came close, and without knowing why he did it, he made on his
breast the sign of the Cross, and called upon the holy name.
No sooner had he done so than the witches screamed like hawks and flew
away, and the pallid face that had been watching him twitched with a spasm of
pain. The man went over to a little wood, and whistled. A jennet with silver
trappings came running to meet him. As he leapt upon the saddle he turned
round, and looked at the young Fisherman sadly.
And the Witch with the red hair tried to fly away also, but the Fisherman
caught her by her wrists, and held her fast.
‘Loose me,’ she cried, ‘and let me go. For thou hast named what should not
be named, and shown the sign that may not be looked at.’
‘Nay,’ he answered, ‘but I will not let thee go till thou hast told me the secret.’

‘What secret?’ said the Witch, wrestling with him like a wild cat, and biting
her foam-flecked lips.
‘Thou knowest,’ he made answer.
Her grass-green eyes grew dim with tears, and she said to the Fisherman, ‘Ask
me anything but that!’
He laughed, and held her all the more tightly.
And when she saw that she could not free herself, she whispered to him,
‘Surely I am as fair as the daughters of the sea, and as comely as those that
dwell in the blue waters,’ and she fawned on him and put her face close to his.
But he thrust her back frowning, and said to her, ‘If thou keepest not the
promise that thou madest to me I will slay thee for a false witch.’
She grew grey as a blossom of the Judas tree, and shuddered. ‘Be it so,’ she
muttered. ‘It is thy soul and not mine. Do with it as thou wilt.’ And she took
from her girdle a little knife that had a handle of green viper’s skin, and gave it
to him.
‘What shall this serve me?’ he asked of her, wondering.
She was silent for a few moments, and a look of terror came over her face.
Then she brushed her hair back from her forehead, and smiling strangely she
said to him, ‘What men call the shadow of the body is not the shadow of the
body, but is the body of the soul. Stand on the sea-shore with thy back to the
moon, and cut away from around thy feet thy shadow, which is thy soul’s
body, and bid thy soul leave thee, and it will do so.’
The young Fisherman trembled. ‘Is this true?’ he murmured.
‘It is true, and I would that I had not told thee of it,’ she cried, and she clung to
his knees weeping.
He put her from him and left her in the rank grass, and going to the edge of the
mountain he placed the knife in his belt and began to climb down.
And his Soul that was within him called out to him and said, ‘Lo! I have
dwelt with thee for all these years, and have been thy servant. Send me not
away from thee now, for what evil have I done thee?’
And the young Fisherman laughed. ‘Thou hast done me no evil, but I have no
need of thee,’ he answered. ‘The world is wide, and there is Heaven also, and
Hell, and that dim twilight house that lies between. Go wherever thou wilt,
but trouble me not, for my love is calling to me.’
And his Soul besought him piteously, but he heeded it not, but leapt from crag

to crag, being sure-footed as a wild goat, and at last he reached the level
ground and the yellow shore of the sea.
Bronze-limbed and well-knit, like a statue wrought by a Grecian, he stood on
the sand with his back to the moon, and out of the foam came white arms that
beckoned to him, and out of the waves rose dim forms that did him homage.
Before him lay his shadow, which was the body of his soul, and behind him
hung the moon in the honey-coloured air.
And his Soul said to him, ‘If indeed thou must drive me from thee, send me
not forth without a heart. The world is cruel, give me thy heart to take with
me.’
He tossed his head and smiled. ‘With what should I love my love if I gave
thee my heart?’ he cried.
‘Nay, but be merciful,’ said his Soul: ‘give me thy heart, for the world is very
cruel, and I am afraid.’
‘My heart is my love’s,’ he answered, ‘therefore tarry not, but get thee gone.’
‘Should I not love also?’ asked his Soul.
‘Get thee gone, for I have no need of thee,’ cried the young Fisherman, and he
took the little knife with its handle of green viper’s skin, and cut away his
shadow from around his feet, and it rose up and stood before him, and looked
at him, and it was even as himself.
He crept back, and thrust the knife into his belt, and a feeling of awe came
over him. ‘Get thee gone,’ he murmured, ‘and let me see thy face no more.’
‘Nay, but we must meet again,’ said the Soul. Its voice was low and flute-like,
and its lips hardly moved while it spake.
‘How shall we meet?’ cried the young Fisherman. ‘Thou wilt not follow me
into the depths of the sea?’
‘Once every year I will come to this place, and call to thee,’ said the Soul. ‘It
may be that thou wilt have need of me.’
‘What need should I have of thee?’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘but be it as
thou wilt,’ and he plunged into the waters and the Tritons blew their horns and
the little Mermaid rose up to meet him, and put her arms around his neck and
kissed him on the mouth.
And the Soul stood on the lonely beach and watched them. And when they
had sunk down into the sea, it went weeping away over the marshes.

And after a year was over the Soul came down to the shore of the sea and
called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep, and said, ‘Why
dost thou call to me?’
And the Soul answered, ‘Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I have
seen marvellous things.’
So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head
upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, ‘When I left thee I turned my face to the East and
journeyed. From the East cometh everything that is wise. Six days I
journeyed, and on the morning of the seventh day I came to a hill that is in the
country of the Tartars. I sat down under the shade of a tamarisk tree to shelter
myself from the sun. The land was dry and burnt up with the heat. The
people went to and fro over the plain like flies crawling upon a disk of
polished copper.
‘When it was noon a cloud of red dust rose up from the flat rim of the land.
When the Tartars saw it, they strung their painted bows, and having leapt upon
their little horses they galloped to meet it. The women fled screaming to the
waggons, and hid themselves behind the felt curtains.
‘At twilight the Tartars returned, but five of them were missing, and of those
that came back not a few had been wounded. They harnessed their horses to
the waggons and drove hastily away. Three jackals came out of a cave and
peered after them. Then they sniffed up the air with their nostrils, and trotted
off in the opposite direction.
‘When the moon rose I saw a camp-fire burning on the plain, and went
towards it. A company of merchants were seated round it on carpets. Their
camels were picketed behind them, and the negroes who were their servants
were pitching tents of tanned skin upon the sand, and making a high wall of
the prickly pear.
‘As I came near them, the chief of the merchants rose up and drew his sword,
and asked me my business.
‘I answered that I was a Prince in my own land, and that I had escaped from
the Tartars, who had sought to make me their slave. The chief smiled, and
showed me five heads fixed upon long reeds of bamboo.
‘Then he asked me who was the prophet of God, and I answered him
Mohammed.
‘When he heard the name of the false prophet, he bowed and took me by the

hand, and placed me by his side. A negro brought me some mare’s milk in a
wooden dish, and a piece of lamb’s flesh roasted.
‘At daybreak we started on our journey. I rode on a red-haired camel by the
side of the chief, and a runner ran before us carrying a spear. The men of war
were on either hand, and the mules followed with the merchandise. There
were forty camels in the caravan, and the mules were twice forty in number.
‘We went from the country of the Tartars into the country of those who curse
the Moon. We saw the Gryphons guarding their gold on the white rocks, and
the scaled Dragons sleeping in their caves. As we passed over the mountains
we held our breath lest the snows might fall on us, and each man tied a veil of
gauze before his eyes. As we passed through the valleys the Pygmies shot
arrows at us from the hollows of the trees, and at night-time we heard the wild
men beating on their drums. When we came to the Tower of Apes we set
fruits before them, and they did not harm us. When we came to the Tower of
Serpents we gave them warm milk in howls of brass, and they let us go by.
Three times in our journey we came to the banks of the Oxus. We crossed it
on rafts of wood with great bladders of blown hide. The river-horses raged
against us and sought to slay us. When the camels saw them they trembled.
‘The kings of each city levied tolls on us, but would not suffer us to enter their
gates. They threw us bread over the walls, little maize-cakes baked in honey
and cakes of fine flour filled with dates. For every hundred baskets we gave
them a bead of amber.
‘When the dwellers in the villages saw us coming, they poisoned the wells and
fled to the hill-summits. We fought with the Magadae who are born old, and
grow younger and younger every year, and die when they are little children;
and with the Laktroi who say that they are the sons of tigers, and paint
themselves yellow and black; and with the Aurantes who bury their dead on
the tops of trees, and themselves live in dark caverns lest the Sun, who is their
god, should slay them; and with the Krimnians who worship a crocodile, and
give it earrings of green glass, and feed it with butter and fresh fowls; and with
the Agazonbae, who are dog-faced; and with the Sibans, who have horses’
feet, and run more swiftly than horses. A third of our company died in battle,
and a third died of want. The rest murmured against me, and said that I had
brought them an evil fortune. I took a horned adder from beneath a stone and
let it sting me. When they saw that I did not sicken they grew afraid.
‘In the fourth month we reached the city of Illel. It was night-time when we
came to the grove that is outside the walls, and the air was sultry, for the Moon
was travelling in Scorpion. We took the ripe pomegranates from the trees, and
brake them, and drank their sweet juices. Then we lay down on our carpets,
and waited for the dawn.

‘And at dawn we rose and knocked at the gate of the city. It was wrought out
of red bronze, and carved with sea-dragons and dragons that have wings. The
guards looked down from the battlements and asked us our business. The
interpreter of the caravan answered that we had come from the island of Syria
with much merchandise. They took hostages, and told us that they would
open the gate to us at noon, and bade us tarry till then.
‘When it was noon they opened the gate, and as we entered in the people came
crowding out of the houses to look at us, and a crier went round the city crying
through a shell. We stood in the market-place, and the negroes uncorded the
bales of figured cloths and opened the carved chests of sycamore. And when
they had ended their task, the merchants set forth their strange wares, the
waxed linen from Egypt and the painted linen from the country of the Ethiops,
the purple sponges from Tyre and the blue hangings from Sidon, the cups of
cold amber and the fine vessels of glass and the curious vessels of burnt clay.
From the roof of a house a company of women watched us. One of them wore
a mask of gilded leather.
‘And on the first day the priests came and bartered with us, and on the second
day came the nobles, and on the third day came the craftsmen and the slaves.
And this is their custom with all merchants as long as they tarry in the city.
‘And we tarried for a moon, and when the moon was waning, I wearied and
wandered away through the streets of the city and came to the garden of its
god. The priests in their yellow robes moved silently through the green trees,
and on a pavement of black marble stood the rose-red house in which the god
had his dwelling. Its doors were of powdered lacquer, and bulls and peacocks
were wrought on them in raised and polished gold. The tilted roof was of seagreen porcelain, and the jutting eaves were festooned with little bells. When
the white doves flew past, they struck the bells with their wings and made
them tinkle.
‘In front of the temple was a pool of clear water paved with veined onyx. I lay
down beside it, and with my pale fingers I touched the broad leaves. One of
the priests came towards me and stood behind me. He had sandals on his feet,
one of soft serpent-skin and the other of birds’ plumage. On his head was a
mitre of black felt decorated with silver crescents. Seven yellows were woven
into his robe, and his frizzed hair was stained with antimony.
‘After a little while he spake to me, and asked me my desire.
‘I told him that my desire was to see the god.
‘“The god is hunting,” said the priest, looking strangely at me with his small
slanting eyes.

‘“Tell me in what forest, and I will ride with him,” I answered.
‘He combed out the soft fringes of his tunic with his long pointed nails. “The
god is asleep,” he murmured.
‘“Tell me on what couch, and I will watch by him,” I answered.
‘“The god is at the feast,” he cried.
‘“If the wine be sweet I will drink it with him, and if it be bitter I will drink it
with him also,” was my answer.
‘He bowed his head in wonder, and, taking me by the hand, he raised me up,
and led me into the temple.
‘And in the first chamber I saw an idol seated on a throne of jasper bordered
with great orient pearls. It was carved out of ebony, and in stature was of the
stature of a man. On its forehead was a ruby, and thick oil dripped from its
hair on to its thighs. Its feet were red with the blood of a newly-slain kid, and
its loins girt with a copper belt that was studded with seven beryls.
‘And I said to the priest, “Is this the god?” And he answered me, “This is the
god.”
‘“Show me the god,” I cried, “or I will surely slay thee.” And I touched his
hand, and it became withered.
‘And the priest besought me, saying, “Let my lord heal his servant, and I will
show him the god.”
‘So I breathed with my breath upon his hand, and it became whole again, and
he trembled and led me into the second chamber, and I saw an idol standing on
a lotus of jade hung with great emeralds. It was carved out of ivory, and in
stature was twice the stature of a man. On its forehead was a chrysolite, and
its breasts were smeared with myrrh and cinnamon. In one hand it held a
crooked sceptre of jade, and in the other a round crystal. It ware buskins of
brass, and its thick neck was circled with a circle of selenites.
‘And I said to the priest, “Is this the god?”
‘And he answered me, “This is the god.”
‘“Show me the god,” I cried, “or I will surely slay thee.” And I touched his
eyes, and they became blind.
‘And the priest besought me, saying, “Let my lord heal his servant, and I will
show him the god.”
‘So I breathed with my breath upon his eyes, and the sight came back to them,
and he trembled again, and led me into the third chamber, and lo! there was no

idol in it, nor image of any kind, but only a mirror of round metal set on an
altar of stone.
‘And I said to the priest, “Where is the god?”
‘And he answered me: “There is no god but this mirror that thou seest, for this
is the Mirror of Wisdom. And it reflecteth all things that are in heaven and on
earth, save only the face of him who looketh into it. This it reflecteth not, so
that he who looketh into it may be wise. Many other mirrors are there, but
they are mirrors of Opinion. This only is the Mirror of Wisdom. And they
who possess this mirror know everything, nor is there anything hidden from
them. And they who possess it not have not Wisdom. Therefore is it the god,
and we worship it.” And I looked into the mirror, and it was even as he had
said to me.
‘And I did a strange thing, but what I did matters not, for in a valley that is but
a day’s journey from this place have I hidden the Mirror of Wisdom. Do but
suffer me to enter into thee again and be thy servant, and thou shalt be wiser
than all the wise men, and Wisdom shall be thine. Suffer me to enter into thee,
and none will be as wise as thou.’
But the young Fisherman laughed. ‘Love is better than Wisdom,’ he cried,
‘and the little Mermaid loves me.’
‘Nay, but there is nothing better than Wisdom,’ said the Soul.
‘Love is better,’ answered the young Fisherman, and he plunged into the deep,
and the Soul went weeping away over the marshes.
And after the second year was over, the Soul came down to the shore of the
sea, and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep and said,
‘Why dost thou call to me?’
And the Soul answered, ‘Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I have
seen marvellous things.’
So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head
upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, ‘When I left thee, I turned my face to the South and
journeyed. From the South cometh everything that is precious. Six days I
journeyed along the highways that lead to the city of Ashter, along the dusty
red-dyed highways by which the pilgrims are wont to go did I journey, and on
the morning of the seventh day I lifted up my eyes, and lo! the city lay at my
feet, for it is in a valley.
‘There are nine gates to this city, and in front of each gate stands a bronze

horse that neighs when the Bedouins come down from the mountains. The
walls are cased with copper, and the watch-towers on the walls are roofed with
brass. In every tower stands an archer with a bow in his hand. At sunrise he
strikes with an arrow on a gong, and at sunset he blows through a horn of
horn.
‘When I sought to enter, the guards stopped me and asked of me who I was. I
made answer that I was a Dervish and on my way to the city of Mecca, where
there was a green veil on which the Koran was embroidered in silver letters by
the hands of the angels. They were filled with wonder, and entreated me to
pass in.
‘Inside it is even as a bazaar. Surely thou shouldst have been with me. Across
the narrow streets the gay lanterns of paper flutter like large butterflies. When
the wind blows over the roofs they rise and fall as painted bubbles do. In front
of their booths sit the merchants on silken carpets. They have straight black
beards, and their turbans are covered with golden sequins, and long strings of
amber and carved peach-stones glide through their cool fingers. Some of them
sell galbanum and nard, and curious perfumes from the islands of the Indian
Sea, and the thick oil of red roses, and myrrh and little nail-shaped cloves.
When one stops to speak to them, they throw pinches of frankincense upon a
charcoal brazier and make the air sweet. I saw a Syrian who held in his hands
a thin rod like a reed. Grey threads of smoke came from it, and its odour as it
burned was as the odour of the pink almond in spring. Others sell silver
bracelets embossed all over with creamy blue turquoise stones, and anklets of
brass wire fringed with little pearls, and tigers’ claws set in gold, and the claws
of that gilt cat, the leopard, set in gold also, and earrings of pierced emerald,
and finger-rings of hollowed jade. From the tea-houses comes the sound of
the guitar, and the opium-smokers with their white smiling faces look out at
the passers-by.
‘Of a truth thou shouldst have been with me. The wine-sellers elbow their
way through the crowd with great black skins on their shoulders. Most of
them sell the wine of Schiraz, which is as sweet as honey. They serve it in
little metal cups and strew rose leaves upon it. In the market-place stand the
fruitsellers, who sell all kinds of fruit: ripe figs, with their bruised purple flesh,
melons, smelling of musk and yellow as topazes, citrons and rose-apples and
clusters of white grapes, round red-gold oranges, and oval lemons of green
gold. Once I saw an elephant go by. Its trunk was painted with vermilion and
turmeric, and over its ears it had a net of crimson silk cord. It stopped
opposite one of the booths and began eating the oranges, and the man only
laughed. Thou canst not think how strange a people they are. When they are
glad they go to the bird-sellers and buy of them a caged bird, and set it free
that their joy may be greater, and when they are sad they scourge themselves

with thorns that their sorrow may not grow less.
‘One evening I met some negroes carrying a heavy palanquin through the
bazaar. It was made of gilded bamboo, and the poles were of vermilion
lacquer studded with brass peacocks. Across the windows hung thin curtains
of muslin embroidered with beetles’ wings and with tiny seed-pearls, and as it
passed by a pale-faced Circassian looked out and smiled at me. I followed
behind, and the negroes hurried their steps and scowled. But I did not care. I
felt a great curiosity come over me.
‘At last they stopped at a square white house. There were no windows to it,
only a little door like the door of a tomb. They set down the palanquin and
knocked three times with a copper hammer. An Armenian in a caftan of green
leather peered through the wicket, and when he saw them he opened, and
spread a carpet on the ground, and the woman stepped out. As she went in,
she turned round and smiled at me again. I had never seen any one so pale.
‘When the moon rose I returned to the same place and sought for the house,
but it was no longer there. When I saw that, I knew who the woman was, and
wherefore she had smiled at me.
‘Certainly thou shouldst have been with me. On the feast of the New Moon
the young Emperor came forth from his palace and went into the mosque to
pray. His hair and beard were dyed with rose-leaves, and his cheeks were
powdered with a fine gold dust. The palms of his feet and hands were yellow
with saffron.
‘At sunrise he went forth from his palace in a robe of silver, and at sunset he
returned to it again in a robe of gold. The people flung themselves on the
ground and hid their faces, but I would not do so. I stood by the stall of a
seller of dates and waited. When the Emperor saw me, he raised his painted
eyebrows and stopped. I stood quite still, and made him no obeisance. The
people marvelled at my boldness, and counselled me to flee from the city. I
paid no heed to them, but went and sat with the sellers of strange gods, who by
reason of their craft are abominated. When I told them what I had done, each
of them gave me a god and prayed me to leave them.
‘That night, as I lay on a cushion in the tea-house that is in the Street of
Pomegranates, the guards of the Emperor entered and led me to the palace. As
I went in they closed each door behind me, and put a chain across it. Inside
was a great court with an arcade running all round. The walls were of white
alabaster, set here and there with blue and green tiles. The pillars were of
green marble, and the pavement of a kind of peach-blossom marble. I had
never seen anything like it before.
‘As I passed across the court two veiled women looked down from a balcony

and cursed me. The guards hastened on, and the butts of the lances rang upon
the polished floor. They opened a gate of wrought ivory, and I found myself
in a watered garden of seven terraces. It was planted with tulip-cups and
moonflowers, and silver-studded aloes. Like a slim reed of crystal a fountain
hung in the dusky air. The cypress-trees were like burnt-out torches. From
one of them a nightingale was singing.
‘At the end of the garden stood a little pavilion. As we approached it two
eunuchs came out to meet us. Their fat bodies swayed as they walked, and
they glanced curiously at me with their yellow-lidded eyes. One of them drew
aside the captain of the guard, and in a low voice whispered to him. The other
kept munching scented pastilles, which he took with an affected gesture out of
an oval box of lilac enamel.
‘After a few moments the captain of the guard dismissed the soldiers. They
went back to the palace, the eunuchs following slowly behind and plucking the
sweet mulberries from the trees as they passed. Once the elder of the two
turned round, and smiled at me with an evil smile.
‘Then the captain of the guard motioned me towards the entrance of the
pavilion. I walked on without trembling, and drawing the heavy curtain aside
I entered in.
‘The young Emperor was stretched on a couch of dyed lion skins, and a
gerfalcon perched upon his wrist. Behind him stood a brass-turbaned Nubian,
naked down to the waist, and with heavy earrings in his split ears. On a table
by the side of the couch lay a mighty scimitar of steel.
‘When the Emperor saw me he frowned, and said to me, “What is thy name?
Knowest thou not that I am Emperor of this city?” But I made him no answer.
‘He pointed with his finger at the scimitar, and the Nubian seized it, and
rushing forward struck at me with great violence. The blade whizzed through
me, and did me no hurt. The man fell sprawling on the floor, and when he
rose up his teeth chattered with terror and he hid himself behind the couch.
‘The Emperor leapt to his feet, and taking a lance from a stand of arms, he
threw it at me. I caught it in its flight, and brake the shaft into two pieces. He
shot at me with an arrow, but I held up my hands and it stopped in mid-air.
Then he drew a dagger from a belt of white leather, and stabbed the Nubian in
the throat lest the slave should tell of his dishonour. The man writhed like a
trampled snake, and a red foam bubbled from his lips.
‘As soon as he was dead the Emperor turned to me, and when he had wiped
away the bright sweat from his brow with a little napkin of purfled and purple
silk, he said to me, “Art thou a prophet, that I may not harm thee, or the son of

a prophet, that I can do thee no hurt? I pray thee leave my city to-night, for
while thou art in it I am no longer its lord.”
‘And I answered him, “I will go for half of thy treasure. Give me half of thy
treasure, and I will go away.”
‘He took me by the hand, and led me out into the garden. When the captain of
the guard saw me, he wondered. When the eunuchs saw me, their knees shook
and they fell upon the ground in fear.
‘There is a chamber in the palace that has eight walls of red porphyry, and a
brass-sealed ceiling hung with lamps. The Emperor touched one of the walls
and it opened, and we passed down a corridor that was lit with many torches.
In niches upon each side stood great wine-jars filled to the brim with silver
pieces. When we reached the centre of the corridor the Emperor spake the
word that may not be spoken, and a granite door swung back on a secret
spring, and he put his hands before his face lest his eyes should be dazzled.
‘Thou couldst not believe how marvellous a place it was. There were huge
tortoise-shells full of pearls, and hollowed moonstones of great size piled up
with red rubies. The gold was stored in coffers of elephant-hide, and the golddust in leather bottles. There were opals and sapphires, the former in cups of
crystal, and the latter in cups of jade. Round green emeralds were ranged in
order upon thin plates of ivory, and in one corner were silk bags filled, some
with turquoise-stones, and others with beryls. The ivory horns were heaped
with purple amethysts, and the horns of brass with chalcedonies and sards.
The pillars, which were of cedar, were hung with strings of yellow lynxstones. In the flat oval shields there were carbuncles, both wine-coloured and
coloured like grass. And yet I have told thee but a tithe of what was there.
‘And when the Emperor had taken away his hands from before his face he said
to me: “This is my house of treasure, and half that is in it is thine, even as I
promised to thee. And I will give thee camels and camel drivers, and they
shall do thy bidding and take thy share of the treasure to whatever part of the
world thou desirest to go. And the thing shall be done to-night, for I would
not that the Sun, who is my father, should see that there is in my city a man
whom I cannot slay.”
‘But I answered him, “The gold that is here is thine, and the silver also is
thine, and thine are the precious jewels and the things of price. As for me, I
have no need of these. Nor shall I take aught from thee but that little ring that
thou wearest on the finger of thy hand.”
‘And the Emperor frowned. “It is but a ring of lead,” he cried, “nor has it any
value. Therefore take thy half of the treasure and go from my city.”

‘“Nay,” I answered, “but I will take nought but that leaden ring, for I know
what is written within it, and for what purpose.”
‘And the Emperor trembled, and besought me and said, “Take all the treasure
and go from my city. The half that is mine shall be thine also.”
‘And I did a strange thing, but what I did matters not, for in a cave that is but a
day’s journey from this place have, I hidden the Ring of Riches. It is but a
day’s journey from this place, and it waits for thy coming. He who has this
Ring is richer than all the kings of the world. Come therefore and take it, and
the world’s riches shall be thine.’
But the young Fisherman laughed. ‘Love is better than Riches,’ he cried, ‘and
the little Mermaid loves me.’
‘Nay, but there is nothing better than Riches,’ said the Soul.
‘Love is better,’ answered the young Fisherman, and he plunged into the deep,
and the Soul went weeping away over the marshes.
And after the third year was over, the Soul came down to the shore of the sea,
and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep and said, ‘Why
dost thou call to me?’
And the Soul answered, ‘Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I have
seen marvellous things.’
So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head
upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, ‘In a city that I know of there is an inn that standeth
by a river. I sat there with sailors who drank of two different-coloured wines,
and ate bread made of barley, and little salt fish served in bay leaves with
vinegar. And as we sat and made merry, there entered to us an old man
bearing a leathern carpet and a lute that had two horns of amber. And when he
had laid out the carpet on the floor, he struck with a quill on the wire strings of
his lute, and a girl whose face was veiled ran in and began to dance before us.
Her face was veiled with a veil of gauze, but her feet were naked. Naked were
her feet, and they moved over the carpet like little white pigeons. Never have
I seen anything so marvellous; and the city in which she dances is but a day’s
journey from this place.’
Now when the young Fisherman heard the words of his Soul, he remembered
that the little Mermaid had no feet and could not dance. And a great desire
came over him, and he said to himself, ‘It is but a day’s journey, and I can
return to my love,’ and he laughed, and stood up in the shallow water, and

strode towards the shore.
And when he had reached the dry shore he laughed again, and held out his
arms to his Soul. And his Soul gave a great cry of joy and ran to meet him,
and entered into him, and the young Fisherman saw stretched before him upon
the sand that shadow of the body that is the body of the Soul.
And his Soul said to him, ‘Let us not tarry, but get hence at once, for the Seagods are jealous, and have monsters that do their bidding.’
So they made haste, and all that night they journeyed beneath the moon, and
all the next day they journeyed beneath the sun, and on the evening of the day
they came to a city.
And the young Fisherman said to his Soul, ‘Is this the city in which she dances
of whom thou didst speak to me?’
And his Soul answered him, ‘It is not this city, but another. Nevertheless let us
enter in.’ So they entered in and passed through the streets, and as they passed
through the Street of the Jewellers the young Fisherman saw a fair silver cup
set forth in a booth. And his Soul said to him, ‘Take that silver cup and hide
it.’
So he took the cup and hid it in the fold of his tunic, and they went hurriedly
out of the city.
And after that they had gone a league from the city, the young Fisherman
frowned, and flung the cup away, and said to his Soul, ‘Why didst thou tell me
to take this cup and hide it, for it was an evil thing to do?’
But his Soul answered him, ‘Be at peace, be at peace.’
And on the evening of the second day they came to a city, and the young
Fisherman said to his Soul, ‘Is this the city in which she dances of whom thou
didst speak to me?’
And his Soul answered him, ‘It is not this city, but another. Nevertheless let us
enter in.’ So they entered in and passed through the streets, and as they passed
through the Street of the Sellers of Sandals, the young Fisherman saw a child
standing by a jar of water. And his Soul said to him, ‘Smite that child.’ So he
smote the child till it wept, and when he had done this they went hurriedly out
of the city.
And after that they had gone a league from the city the young Fisherman grew
wroth, and said to his Soul, ‘Why didst thou tell me to smite the child, for it
was an evil thing to do?’

But his Soul answered him, ‘Be at peace, be at peace.’
And on the evening of the third day they came to a city, and the young
Fisherman said to his Soul, ‘Is this the city in which she dances of whom thou
didst speak to me?’
And his Soul answered him, ‘It may be that it is in this city, therefore let us
enter in.’
So they entered in and passed through the streets, but nowhere could the
young Fisherman find the river or the inn that stood by its side. And the
people of the city looked curiously at him, and he grew afraid and said to his
Soul, ‘Let us go hence, for she who dances with white feet is not here.’
But his Soul answered, ‘Nay, but let us tarry, for the night is dark and there
will be robbers on the way.’
So he sat him down in the market-place and rested, and after a time there went
by a hooded merchant who had a cloak of cloth of Tartary, and bare a lantern
of pierced horn at the end of a jointed reed. And the merchant said to him,
‘Why dost thou sit in the market-place, seeing that the booths are closed and
the bales corded?’
And the young Fisherman answered him, ‘I can find no inn in this city, nor
have I any kinsman who might give me shelter.’
‘Are we not all kinsmen?’ said the merchant. ‘And did not one God make us?
Therefore come with me, for I have a guest-chamber.’
So the young Fisherman rose up and followed the merchant to his house. And
when he had passed through a garden of pomegranates and entered into the
house, the merchant brought him rose-water in a copper dish that he might
wash his hands, and ripe melons that he might quench his thirst, and set a bowl
of rice and a piece of roasted kid before him.
And after that he had finished, the merchant led him to the guest-chamber, and
bade him sleep and be at rest. And the young Fisherman gave him thanks, and
kissed the ring that was on his hand, and flung himself down on the carpets of
dyed goat’s-hair. And when he had covered himself with a covering of black
lamb’s-wool he fell asleep.
And three hours before dawn, and while it was still night, his Soul waked him
and said to him, ‘Rise up and go to the room of the merchant, even to the room
in which he sleepeth, and slay him, and take from him his gold, for we have
need of it.’
And the young Fisherman rose up and crept towards the room of the merchant,
and over the feet of the merchant there was lying a curved sword, and the tray

by the side of the merchant held nine purses of gold. And he reached out his
hand and touched the sword, and when he touched it the merchant started and
awoke, and leaping up seized himself the sword and cried to the young
Fisherman, ‘Dost thou return evil for good, and pay with the shedding of
blood for the kindness that I have shown thee?’
And his Soul said to the young Fisherman, ‘Strike him,’ and he struck him so
that he swooned and he seized then the nine purses of gold, and fled hastily
through the garden of pomegranates, and set his face to the star that is the star
of morning.
And when they had gone a league from the city, the young Fisherman beat his
breast, and said to his Soul, ‘Why didst thou bid me slay the merchant and
take his gold? Surely thou art evil.’
But his Soul answered him, ‘Be at peace, be at peace.’
‘Nay,’ cried the young Fisherman, ‘I may not be at peace, for all that thou hast
made me to do I hate. Thee also I hate, and I bid thee tell me wherefore thou
hast wrought with me in this wise.’
And his Soul answered him, ‘When thou didst send me forth into the world
thou gavest me no heart, so I learned to do all these things and love them.’
‘What sayest thou?’ murmured the young Fisherman.
‘Thou knowest,’ answered his Soul, ‘thou knowest it well. Hast thou forgotten
that thou gavest me no heart? I trow not. And so trouble not thyself nor me,
but be at peace, for there is no pain that thou shalt not give away, nor any
pleasure that thou shalt not receive.’
And when the young Fisherman heard these words he trembled and said to his
Soul, ‘Nay, but thou art evil, and hast made me forget my love, and hast
tempted me with temptations, and hast set my feet in the ways of sin.’
And his Soul answered him, ‘Thou hast not forgotten that when thou didst
send me forth into the world thou gavest me no heart. Come, let us go to
another city, and make merry, for we have nine purses of gold.’
But the young Fisherman took the nine purses of gold, and flung them down,
and trampled on them.
‘Nay,’ he cried, ‘but I will have nought to do with thee, nor will I journey with
thee anywhere, but even as I sent thee away before, so will I send thee away
now, for thou hast wrought me no good.’ And he turned his back to the moon,
and with the little knife that had the handle of green viper’s skin he strove to
cut from his feet that shadow of the body which is the body of the Soul.

Yet his Soul stirred not from him, nor paid heed to his command, but said to
him, ‘The spell that the Witch told thee avails thee no more, for I may not
leave thee, nor mayest thou drive me forth. Once in his life may a man send
his Soul away, but he who receiveth back his Soul must keep it with him for
ever, and this is his punishment and his reward.’
And the young Fisherman grew pale and clenched his hands and cried, ‘She
was a false Witch in that she told me not that.’
‘Nay,’ answered his Soul, ‘but she was true to Him she worships, and whose
servant she will be ever.’
And when the young Fisherman knew that he could no longer get rid of his
Soul, and that it was an evil Soul and would abide with him always, he fell
upon the ground weeping bitterly.
And when it was day the young Fisherman rose up and said to his Soul, ‘I will
bind my hands that I may not do thy bidding, and close my lips that I may not
speak thy words, and I will return to the place where she whom I love has her
dwelling. Even to the sea will I return, and to the little bay where she is wont
to sing, and I will call to her and tell her the evil I have done and the evil thou
hast wrought on me.’
And his Soul tempted him and said, ‘Who is thy love, that thou shouldst return
to her? The world has many fairer than she is. There are the dancing-girls of
Samaris who dance in the manner of all kinds of birds and beasts. Their feet
are painted with henna, and in their hands they have little copper bells. They
laugh while they dance, and their laughter is as clear as the laughter of water.
Come with me and I will show them to thee. For what is this trouble of thine
about the things of sin? Is that which is pleasant to eat not made for the eater?
Is there poison in that which is sweet to drink? Trouble not thyself, but come
with me to another city. There is a little city hard by in which there is a garden
of tulip-trees. And there dwell in this comely garden white peacocks and
peacocks that have blue breasts. Their tails when they spread them to the sun
are like disks of ivory and like gilt disks. And she who feeds them dances for
their pleasure, and sometimes she dances on her hands and at other times she
dances with her feet. Her eyes are coloured with stibium, and her nostrils are
shaped like the wings of a swallow. From a hook in one of her nostrils hangs a
flower that is carved out of a pearl. She laughs while she dances, and the
silver rings that are about her ankles tinkle like bells of silver. And so trouble
not thyself any more, but come with me to this city.’
But the young Fisherman answered not his Soul, but closed his lips with the
seal of silence and with a tight cord bound his hands, and journeyed back to

the place from which he had come, even to the little bay where his love had
been wont to sing. And ever did his Soul tempt him by the way, but he made
it no answer, nor would he do any of the wickedness that it sought to make
him to do, so great was the power of the love that was within him.
And when he had reached the shore of the sea, he loosed the cord from his
hands, and took the seal of silence from his lips, and called to the little
Mermaid. But she came not to his call, though he called to her all day long
and besought her.
And his Soul mocked him and said, ‘Surely thou hast but little joy out of thy
love. Thou art as one who in time of death pours water into a broken vessel.
Thou givest away what thou hast, and nought is given to thee in return. It
were better for thee to come with me, for I know where the Valley of Pleasure
lies, and what things are wrought there.’
But the young Fisherman answered not his Soul, but in a cleft of the rock he
built himself a house of wattles, and abode there for the space of a year. And
every morning he called to the Mermaid, and every noon he called to her
again, and at night-time he spake her name. Yet never did she rise out of the
sea to meet him, nor in any place of the sea could he find her though he sought
for her in the caves and in the green water, in the pools of the tide and in the
wells that are at the bottom of the deep.
And ever did his Soul tempt him with evil, and whisper of terrible things. Yet
did it not prevail against him, so great was the power of his love.
And after the year was over, the Soul thought within himself, ‘I have tempted
my master with evil, and his love is stronger than I am. I will tempt him now
with good, and it may be that he will come with me.’
So he spake to the young Fisherman and said, ‘I have told thee of the joy of
the world, and thou hast turned a deaf ear to me. Suffer me now to tell thee of
the world’s pain, and it may be that thou wilt hearken. For of a truth pain is
the Lord of this world, nor is there any one who escapes from its net. There be
some who lack raiment, and others who lack bread. There be widows who sit
in purple, and widows who sit in rags. To and fro over the fens go the lepers,
and they are cruel to each other. The beggars go up and down on the
highways, and their wallets are empty. Through the streets of the cities walks
Famine, and the Plague sits at their gates. Come, let us go forth and mend
these things, and make them not to be. Wherefore shouldst thou tarry here
calling to thy love, seeing she comes not to thy call? And what is love, that
thou shouldst set this high store upon it?’
But the young Fisherman answered it nought, so great was the power of his
love. And every morning he called to the Mermaid, and every noon he called

to her again, and at night-time he spake her name. Yet never did she rise out
of the sea to meet him, nor in any place of the sea could he find her, though he
sought for her in the rivers of the sea, and in the valleys that are under the
waves, in the sea that the night makes purple, and in the sea that the dawn
leaves grey.
And after the second year was over, the Soul said to the young Fisherman at
night-time, and as he sat in the wattled house alone, ‘Lo! now I have tempted
thee with evil, and I have tempted thee with good, and thy love is stronger
than I am. Wherefore will I tempt thee no longer, but I pray thee to suffer me
to enter thy heart, that I may be one with thee even as before.’
‘Surely thou mayest enter,’ said the young Fisherman, ‘for in the days when
with no heart thou didst go through the world thou must have much suffered.’
‘Alas!’ cried his Soul, ‘I can find no place of entrance, so compassed about
with love is this heart of thine.’
‘Yet I would that I could help thee,’ said the young Fisherman.
And as he spake there came a great cry of mourning from the sea, even the cry
that men hear when one of the Sea-folk is dead. And the young Fisherman
leapt up, and left his wattled house, and ran down to the shore. And the black
waves came hurrying to the shore, bearing with them a burden that was whiter
than silver. White as the surf it was, and like a flower it tossed on the waves.
And the surf took it from the waves, and the foam took it from the surf, and
the shore received it, and lying at his feet the young Fisherman saw the body
of the little Mermaid. Dead at his feet it was lying.
Weeping as one smitten with pain he flung himself down beside it, and he
kissed the cold red of the mouth, and toyed with the wet amber of the hair. He
flung himself down beside it on the sand, weeping as one trembling with joy,
and in his brown arms he held it to his breast. Cold were the lips, yet he
kissed them. Salt was the honey of the hair, yet he tasted it with a bitter joy.
He kissed the closed eyelids, and the wild spray that lay upon their cups was
less salt than his tears.
And to the dead thing he made confession. Into the shells of its ears he poured
the harsh wine of his tale. He put the little hands round his neck, and with his
fingers he touched the thin reed of the throat. Bitter, bitter was his joy, and
full of strange gladness was his pain.
The black sea came nearer, and the white foam moaned like a leper. With
white claws of foam the sea grabbled at the shore. From the palace of the SeaKing came the cry of mourning again, and far out upon the sea the great
Tritons blew hoarsely upon their horns.

‘Flee away,’ said his Soul, ‘for ever doth the sea come nigher, and if thou
tarriest it will slay thee. Flee away, for I am afraid, seeing that thy heart is
closed against me by reason of the greatness of thy love. Flee away to a place
of safety. Surely thou wilt not send me without a heart into another world?’
But the young Fisherman listened not to his Soul, but called on the little
Mermaid and said, ‘Love is better than wisdom, and more precious than
riches, and fairer than the feet of the daughters of men. The fires cannot
destroy it, nor can the waters quench it. I called on thee at dawn, and thou
didst not come to my call. The moon heard thy name, yet hadst thou no heed
of me. For evilly had I left thee, and to my own hurt had I wandered away.
Yet ever did thy love abide with me, and ever was it strong, nor did aught
prevail against it, though I have looked upon evil and looked upon good. And
now that thou art dead, surely I will die with thee also.’
And his Soul besought him to depart, but he would not, so great was his love.
And the sea came nearer, and sought to cover him with its waves, and when he
knew that the end was at hand he kissed with mad lips the cold lips of the
Mermaid, and the heart that was within him brake. And as through the fulness
of his love his heart did break, the Soul found an entrance and entered in, and
was one with him even as before. And the sea covered the young Fisherman
with its waves.
And in the morning the Priest went forth to bless the sea, for it had been
troubled. And with him went the monks and the musicians, and the candlebearers, and the swingers of censers, and a great company.
And when the Priest reached the shore he saw the young Fisherman lying
drowned in the surf, and clasped in his arms was the body of the little
Mermaid. And he drew back frowning, and having made the sign of the cross,
he cried aloud and said, ‘I will not bless the sea nor anything that is in it.
Accursed be the Sea-folk, and accursed be all they who traffic with them. And
as for him who for love’s sake forsook God, and so lieth here with his leman
slain by God’s judgment, take up his body and the body of his leman, and bury
them in the corner of the Field of the Fullers, and set no mark above them, nor
sign of any kind, that none may know the place of their resting. For accursed
were they in their lives, and accursed shall they be in their deaths also.’
And the people did as he commanded them, and in the corner of the Field of
the Fullers, where no sweet herbs grew, they dug a deep pit, and laid the dead
things within it.
And when the third year was over, and on a day that was a holy day, the Priest
went up to the chapel, that he might show to the people the wounds of the

Lord, and speak to them about the wrath of God.
And when he had robed himself with his robes, and entered in and bowed
himself before the altar, he saw that the altar was covered with strange flowers
that never had been seen before. Strange were they to look at, and of curious
beauty, and their beauty troubled him, and their odour was sweet in his
nostrils. And he felt glad, and understood not why he was glad.
And after that he had opened the tabernacle, and incensed the monstrance that
was in it, and shown the fair wafer to the people, and hid it again behind the
veil of veils, he began to speak to the people, desiring to speak to them of the
wrath of God. But the beauty of the white flowers troubled him, and their
odour was sweet in his nostrils, and there came another word into his lips, and
he spake not of the wrath of God, but of the God whose name is Love. And
why he so spake, he knew not.
And when he had finished his word the people wept, and the Priest went back
to the sacristy, and his eyes were full of tears. And the deacons came in and
began to unrobe him, and took from him the alb and the girdle, the maniple
and the stole. And he stood as one in a dream.
And after that they had unrobed him, he looked at them and said, ‘What are
the flowers that stand on the altar, and whence do they come?’
And they answered him, ‘What flowers they are we cannot tell, but they come
from the corner of the Fullers’ Field.’ And the Priest trembled, and returned to
his own house and prayed.
And in the morning, while it was still dawn, he went forth with the monks and
the musicians, and the candle-bearers and the swingers of censers, and a great
company, and came to the shore of the sea, and blessed the sea, and all the
wild things that are in it. The Fauns also he blessed, and the little things that
dance in the woodland, and the bright-eyed things that peer through the
leaves. All the things in God’s world he blessed, and the people were filled
with joy and wonder. Yet never again in the corner of the Fullers’ Field grew
flowers of any kind, but the field remained barren even as before. Nor came
the Sea-folk into the bay as they had been wont to do, for they went to another
part of the sea.

THE STAR-CHILD
[TO MISS MARGOT TENNANT - MRS. ASQUITH]

Once upon a time two poor Woodcutters were making their way home through
a great pine-forest. It was winter, and a night of bitter cold. The snow lay
thick upon the ground, and upon the branches of the trees: the frost kept
snapping the little twigs on either side of them, as they passed: and when they
came to the Mountain-Torrent she was hanging motionless in air, for the IceKing had kissed her.
So cold was it that even the animals and the birds did not know what to make
of it.
‘Ugh!’ snarled the Wolf, as he limped through the brushwood with his tail
between his legs, ‘this is perfectly monstrous weather. Why doesn’t the
Government look to it?’
‘Weet! weet! weet!’ twittered the green Linnets, ‘the old Earth is dead and they
have laid her out in her white shroud.’
‘The Earth is going to be married, and this is her bridal dress,’ whispered the
Turtle-doves to each other. Their little pink feet were quite frost-bitten, but
they felt that it was their duty to take a romantic view of the situation.
‘Nonsense!’ growled the Wolf. ‘I tell you that it is all the fault of the
Government, and if you don’t believe me I shall eat you.’ The Wolf had a
thoroughly practical mind, and was never at a loss for a good argument.
‘Well, for my own part,’ said the Woodpecker, who was a born philosopher, ‘I
don’t care an atomic theory for explanations. If a thing is so, it is so, and at
present it is terribly cold.’
Terribly cold it certainly was. The little Squirrels, who lived inside the tall firtree, kept rubbing each other’s noses to keep themselves warm, and the
Rabbits curled themselves up in their holes, and did not venture even to look
out of doors. The only people who seemed to enjoy it were the great horned
Owls. Their feathers were quite stiff with rime, but they did not mind, and
they rolled their large yellow eyes, and called out to each other across the
forest, ‘Tu-whit! Tu-whoo! Tu-whit! Tu-whoo! what delightful weather we
are having!’
On and on went the two Woodcutters, blowing lustily upon their fingers, and
stamping with their huge iron-shod boots upon the caked snow. Once they
sank into a deep drift, and came out as white as millers are, when the stones
are grinding; and once they slipped on the hard smooth ice where the marshwater was frozen, and their faggots fell out of their bundles, and they had to
pick them up and bind them together again; and once they thought that they
had lost their way, and a great terror seized on them, for they knew that the
Snow is cruel to those who sleep in her arms. But they put their trust in the

good Saint Martin, who watches over all travellers, and retraced their steps,
and went warily, and at last they reached the outskirts of the forest, and saw,
far down in the valley beneath them, the lights of the village in which they
dwelt.
So overjoyed were they at their deliverance that they laughed aloud, and the
Earth seemed to them like a flower of silver, and the Moon like a flower of
gold.
Yet, after that they had laughed they became sad, for they remembered their
poverty, and one of them said to the other, ‘Why did we make merry, seeing
that life is for the rich, and not for such as we are? Better that we had died of
cold in the forest, or that some wild beast had fallen upon us and slain us.’
‘Truly,’ answered his companion, ‘much is given to some, and little is given to
others. Injustice has parcelled out the world, nor is there equal division of
aught save of sorrow.’
But as they were bewailing their misery to each other this strange thing
happened. There fell from heaven a very bright and beautiful star. It slipped
down the side of the sky, passing by the other stars in its course, and, as they
watched it wondering, it seemed to them to sink behind a clump of willowtrees that stood hard by a little sheepfold no more than a stone’s-throw away.
‘Why! there is a crook of gold for whoever finds it,’ they cried, and they set to
and ran, so eager were they for the gold.
And one of them ran faster than his mate, and outstripped him, and forced his
way through the willows, and came out on the other side, and lo! there was
indeed a thing of gold lying on the white snow. So he hastened towards it, and
stooping down placed his hands upon it, and it was a cloak of golden tissue,
curiously wrought with stars, and wrapped in many folds. And he cried out to
his comrade that he had found the treasure that had fallen from the sky, and
when his comrade had come up, they sat them down in the snow, and loosened
the folds of the cloak that they might divide the pieces of gold. But, alas! no
gold was in it, nor silver, nor, indeed, treasure of any kind, but only a little
child who was asleep.
And one of them said to the other: ‘This is a bitter ending to our hope, nor
have we any good fortune, for what doth a child profit to a man? Let us leave
it here, and go our way, seeing that we are poor men, and have children of our
own whose bread we may not give to another.’
But his companion answered him: ‘Nay, but it were an evil thing to leave the
child to perish here in the snow, and though I am as poor as thou art, and have
many mouths to feed, and but little in the pot, yet will I bring it home with me,

and my wife shall have care of it.’
So very tenderly he took up the child, and wrapped the cloak around it to
shield it from the harsh cold, and made his way down the hill to the village, his
comrade marvelling much at his foolishness and softness of heart.
And when they came to the village, his comrade said to him, ‘Thou hast the
child, therefore give me the cloak, for it is meet that we should share.’
But he answered him: ‘Nay, for the cloak is neither mine nor thine, but the
child’s only,’ and he bade him Godspeed, and went to his own house and
knocked.
And when his wife opened the door and saw that her husband had returned
safe to her, she put her arms round his neck and kissed him, and took from his
back the bundle of faggots, and brushed the snow off his boots, and bade him
come in.
But he said to her, ‘I have found something in the forest, and I have brought it
to thee to have care of it,’ and he stirred not from the threshold.
‘What is it?’ she cried. ‘Show it to me, for the house is bare, and we have
need of many things.’ And he drew the cloak back, and showed her the
sleeping child.
‘Alack, goodman!’ she murmured, ‘have we not children of our own, that thou
must needs bring a changeling to sit by the hearth? And who knows if it will
not bring us bad fortune? And how shall we tend it?’ And she was wroth
against him.
‘Nay, but it is a Star-Child,’ he answered; and he told her the strange manner
of the finding of it.
But she would not be appeased, but mocked at him, and spoke angrily, and
cried: ‘Our children lack bread, and shall we feed the child of another? Who
is there who careth for us? And who giveth us food?’
‘Nay, but God careth for the sparrows even, and feedeth them,’ he answered.
‘Do not the sparrows die of hunger in the winter?’ she asked. ‘And is it not
winter now?’
And the man answered nothing, but stirred not from the threshold.
And a bitter wind from the forest came in through the open door, and made her
tremble, and she shivered, and said to him: ‘Wilt thou not close the door?
There cometh a bitter wind into the house, and I am cold.’
‘Into a house where a heart is hard cometh there not always a bitter wind?’ he

asked. And the woman answered him nothing, but crept closer to the fire.
And after a time she turned round and looked at him, and her eyes were full of
tears. And he came in swiftly, and placed the child in her arms, and she kissed
it, and laid it in a little bed where the youngest of their own children was
lying. And on the morrow the Woodcutter took the curious cloak of gold and
placed it in a great chest, and a chain of amber that was round the child’s neck
his wife took and set it in the chest also.
So the Star-Child was brought up with the children of the Woodcutter, and sat
at the same board with them, and was their playmate. And every year he
became more beautiful to look at, so that all those who dwelt in the village
were filled with wonder, for, while they were swarthy and black-haired, he
was white and delicate as sawn ivory, and his curls were like the rings of the
daffodil. His lips, also, were like the petals of a red flower, and his eyes were
like violets by a river of pure water, and his body like the narcissus of a field
where the mower comes not.
Yet did his beauty work him evil. For he grew proud, and cruel, and selfish.
The children of the Woodcutter, and the other children of the village, he
despised, saying that they were of mean parentage, while he was noble, being
sprang from a Star, and he made himself master over them, and called them
his servants. No pity had he for the poor, or for those who were blind or
maimed or in any way afflicted, but would cast stones at them and drive them
forth on to the highway, and bid them beg their bread elsewhere, so that none
save the outlaws came twice to that village to ask for alms. Indeed, he was as
one enamoured of beauty, and would mock at the weakly and ill-favoured, and
make jest of them; and himself he loved, and in summer, when the winds were
still, he would lie by the well in the priest’s orchard and look down at the
marvel of his own face, and laugh for the pleasure he had in his fairness.
Often did the Woodcutter and his wife chide him, and say: ‘We did not deal
with thee as thou dealest with those who are left desolate, and have none to
succour them. Wherefore art thou so cruel to all who need pity?’
Often did the old priest send for him, and seek to teach him the love of living
things, saying to him: ‘The fly is thy brother. Do it no harm. The wild birds
that roam through the forest have their freedom. Snare them not for thy
pleasure. God made the blind-worm and the mole, and each has its place.
Who art thou to bring pain into God’s world? Even the cattle of the field
praise Him.’
But the Star-Child heeded not their words, but would frown and flout, and go
back to his companions, and lead them. And his companions followed him,
for he was fair, and fleet of foot, and could dance, and pipe, and make music.

And wherever the Star-Child led them they followed, and whatever the StarChild bade them do, that did they. And when he pierced with a sharp reed the
dim eyes of the mole, they laughed, and when he cast stones at the leper they
laughed also. And in all things he ruled them, and they became hard of heart
even as he was.
Now there passed one day through the village a poor beggar-woman. Her
garments were torn and ragged, and her feet were bleeding from the rough
road on which she had travelled, and she was in very evil plight. And being
weary she sat her down under a chestnut-tree to rest.
But when the Star-Child saw her, he said to his companions, ‘See! There
sitteth a foul beggar-woman under that fair and green-leaved tree. Come, let
us drive her hence, for she is ugly and ill-favoured.’
So he came near and threw stones at her, and mocked her, and she looked at
him with terror in her eyes, nor did she move her gaze from him. And when
the Woodcutter, who was cleaving logs in a haggard hard by, saw what the
Star-Child was doing, he ran up and rebuked him, and said to him: ‘Surely
thou art hard of heart and knowest not mercy, for what evil has this poor
woman done to thee that thou shouldst treat her in this wise?’
And the Star-Child grew red with anger, and stamped his foot upon the
ground, and said, ‘Who art thou to question me what I do? I am no son of
thine to do thy bidding.’
‘Thou speakest truly,’ answered the Woodcutter, ‘yet did I show thee pity
when I found thee in the forest.’
And when the woman heard these words she gave a loud cry, and fell into a
swoon. And the Woodcutter carried her to his own house, and his wife had
care of her, and when she rose up from the swoon into which she had fallen,
they set meat and drink before her, and bade her have comfort.
But she would neither eat nor drink, but said to the Woodcutter, ‘Didst thou
not say that the child was found in the forest? And was it not ten years from
this day?’
And the Woodcutter answered, ‘Yea, it was in the forest that I found him, and
it is ten years from this day.’
‘And what signs didst thou find with him?’ she cried. ‘Bare he not upon his
neck a chain of amber? Was not round him a cloak of gold tissue broidered
with stars?’
‘Truly,’ answered the Woodcutter, ‘it was even as thou sayest.’ And he took

the cloak and the amber chain from the chest where they lay, and showed them
to her.
And when she saw them she wept for joy, and said, ‘He is my little son whom
I lost in the forest. I pray thee send for him quickly, for in search of him have
I wandered over the whole world.’
So the Woodcutter and his wife went out and called to the Star-Child, and said
to him, ‘Go into the house, and there shalt thou find thy mother, who is
waiting for thee.’
So he ran in, filled with wonder and great gladness. But when he saw her who
was waiting there, he laughed scornfully and said, ‘Why, where is my
mother? For I see none here but this vile beggar-woman.’
And the woman answered him, ‘I am thy mother.’
‘Thou art mad to say so,’ cried the Star-Child angrily. ‘I am no son of thine,
for thou art a beggar, and ugly, and in rags. Therefore get thee hence, and let
me see thy foul face no more.’
‘Nay, but thou art indeed my little son, whom I bare in the forest,’ she cried,
and she fell on her knees, and held out her arms to him. ‘The robbers stole
thee from me, and left thee to die,’ she murmured, ‘but I recognised thee when
I saw thee, and the signs also have I recognised, the cloak of golden tissue and
the amber chain. Therefore I pray thee come with me, for over the whole
world have I wandered in search of thee. Come with me, my son, for I have
need of thy love.’
But the Star-Child stirred not from his place, but shut the doors of his heart
against her, nor was there any sound heard save the sound of the woman
weeping for pain.
And at last he spoke to her, and his voice was hard and bitter. ‘If in very truth
thou art my mother,’ he said, ‘it had been better hadst thou stayed away, and
not come here to bring me to shame, seeing that I thought I was the child of
some Star, and not a beggar’s child, as thou tellest me that I am. Therefore get
thee hence, and let me see thee no more.’
‘Alas! my son,’ she cried, ‘wilt thou not kiss me before I go? For I have
suffered much to find thee.’
‘Nay,’ said the Star-Child, ‘but thou art too foul to look at, and rather would I
kiss the adder or the toad than thee.’
So the woman rose up, and went away into the forest weeping bitterly, and
when the Star-Child saw that she had gone, he was glad, and ran back to his
playmates that he might play with them.

But when they beheld him coming, they mocked him and said, ‘Why, thou art
as foul as the toad, and as loathsome as the adder. Get thee hence, for we will
not suffer thee to play with us,’ and they drave him out of the garden.
And the Star-Child frowned and said to himself, ‘What is this that they say to
me? I will go to the well of water and look into it, and it shall tell me of my
beauty.’
So he went to the well of water and looked into it, and lo! his face was as the
face of a toad, and his body was sealed like an adder. And he flung himself
down on the grass and wept, and said to himself, ‘Surely this has come upon
me by reason of my sin. For I have denied my mother, and driven her away,
and been proud, and cruel to her. Wherefore I will go and seek her through the
whole world, nor will I rest till I have found her.’
And there came to him the little daughter of the Woodcutter, and she put her
hand upon his shoulder and said, ‘What doth it matter if thou hast lost thy
comeliness? Stay with us, and I will not mock at thee.’
And he said to her, ‘Nay, but I have been cruel to my mother, and as a
punishment has this evil been sent to me. Wherefore I must go hence, and
wander through the world till I find her, and she give me her forgiveness.’
So he ran away into the forest and called out to his mother to come to him, but
there was no answer. All day long he called to her, and, when the sun set he
lay down to sleep on a bed of leaves, and the birds and the animals fled from
him, for they remembered his cruelty, and he was alone save for the toad that
watched him, and the slow adder that crawled past.
And in the morning he rose up, and plucked some bitter berries from the trees
and ate them, and took his way through the great wood, weeping sorely. And
of everything that he met he made inquiry if perchance they had seen his
mother.
He said to the Mole, ‘Thou canst go beneath the earth. Tell me, is my mother
there?’
And the Mole answered, ‘Thou hast blinded mine eyes. How should I know?’
He said to the Linnet, ‘Thou canst fly over the tops of the tall trees, and canst
see the whole world. Tell me, canst thou see my mother?’
And the Linnet answered, ‘Thou hast clipt my wings for thy pleasure. How
should I fly?’
And to the little Squirrel who lived in the fir-tree, and was lonely, he said,
‘Where is my mother?’

And the Squirrel answered, ‘Thou hast slain mine. Dost thou seek to slay
thine also?’
And the Star-Child wept and bowed his head, and prayed forgiveness of God’s
things, and went on through the forest, seeking for the beggar-woman. And on
the third day he came to the other side of the forest and went down into the
plain.
And when he passed through the villages the children mocked him, and threw
stones at him, and the carlots would not suffer him even to sleep in the byres
lest he might bring mildew on the stored corn, so foul was he to look at, and
their hired men drave him away, and there was none who had pity on him.
Nor could he hear anywhere of the beggar-woman who was his mother,
though for the space of three years he wandered over the world, and often
seemed to see her on the road in front of him, and would call to her, and run
after her till the sharp flints made his feet to bleed. But overtake her he could
not, and those who dwelt by the way did ever deny that they had seen her, or
any like to her, and they made sport of his sorrow.
For the space of three years he wandered over the world, and in the world
there was neither love nor loving-kindness nor charity for him, but it was even
such a world as he had made for himself in the days of his great pride.
And one evening he came to the gate of a strong-walled city that stood by a
river, and, weary and footsore though he was, he made to enter in. But the
soldiers who stood on guard dropped their halberts across the entrance, and
said roughly to him, ‘What is thy business in the city?’
‘I am seeking for my mother,’ he answered, ‘and I pray ye to suffer me to pass,
for it may be that she is in this city.’
But they mocked at him, and one of them wagged a black beard, and set down
his shield and cried, ‘Of a truth, thy mother will not be merry when she sees
thee, for thou art more ill-favoured than the toad of the marsh, or the adder
that crawls in the fen. Get thee gone. Get thee gone. Thy mother dwells not
in this city.’
And another, who held a yellow banner in his hand, said to him, ‘Who is thy
mother, and wherefore art thou seeking for her?’
And he answered, ‘My mother is a beggar even as I am, and I have treated her
evilly, and I pray ye to suffer me to pass that she may give me her forgiveness,
if it be that she tarrieth in this city.’ But they would not, and pricked him with
their spears.
And, as he turned away weeping, one whose armour was inlaid with gilt

flowers, and on whose helmet couched a lion that had wings, came up and
made inquiry of the soldiers who it was who had sought entrance. And they
said to him, ‘It is a beggar and the child of a beggar, and we have driven him
away.’
‘Nay,’ he cried, laughing, ‘but we will sell the foul thing for a slave, and his
price shall be the price of a bowl of sweet wine.’
And an old and evil-visaged man who was passing by called out, and said, ‘I
will buy him for that price,’ and, when he had paid the price, he took the StarChild by the hand and led him into the city.
And after that they had gone through many streets they came to a little door
that was set in a wall that was covered with a pomegranate tree. And the old
man touched the door with a ring of graved jasper and it opened, and they
went down five steps of brass into a garden filled with black poppies and
green jars of burnt clay. And the old man took then from his turban a scarf of
figured silk, and bound with it the eyes of the Star-Child, and drave him in
front of him. And when the scarf was taken off his eyes, the Star-Child found
himself in a dungeon, that was lit by a lantern of horn.
And the old man set before him some mouldy bread on a trencher and said,
‘Eat,’ and some brackish water in a cup and said, ‘Drink,’ and when he had
eaten and drunk, the old man went out, locking the door behind him and
fastening it with an iron chain.
And on the morrow the old man, who was indeed the subtlest of the magicians
of Libya and had learned his art from one who dwelt in the tombs of the Nile,
came in to him and frowned at him, and said, ‘In a wood that is nigh to the
gate of this city of Giaours there are three pieces of gold. One is of white
gold, and another is of yellow gold, and the gold of the third one is red. Today thou shalt bring me the piece of white gold, and if thou bringest it not
back, I will beat thee with a hundred stripes. Get thee away quickly, and at
sunset I will be waiting for thee at the door of the garden. See that thou
bringest the white gold, or it shall go ill with thee, for thou art my slave, and I
have bought thee for the price of a bowl of sweet wine.’ And he bound the
eyes of the Star-Child with the scarf of figured silk, and led him through the
house, and through the garden of poppies, and up the five steps of brass. And
having opened the little door with his ring he set him in the street.
And the Star-Child went out of the gate of the city, and came to the wood of
which the Magician had spoken to him.

Now this wood was very fair to look at from without, and seemed full of
singing birds and of sweet-scented flowers, and the Star-Child entered it
gladly. Yet did its beauty profit him little, for wherever he went harsh briars
and thorns shot up from the ground and encompassed him, and evil nettles
stung him, and the thistle pierced him with her daggers, so that he was in sore
distress. Nor could he anywhere find the piece of white gold of which the
Magician had spoken, though he sought for it from morn to noon, and from
noon to sunset. And at sunset he set his face towards home, weeping bitterly,
for he knew what fate was in store for him.
But when he had reached the outskirts of the wood, he heard from a thicket a
cry as of some one in pain. And forgetting his own sorrow he ran back to the
place, and saw there a little Hare caught in a trap that some hunter had set for
it.
And the Star-Child had pity on it, and released it, and said to it, ‘I am myself
but a slave, yet may I give thee thy freedom.’
And the Hare answered him, and said: ‘Surely thou hast given me freedom,
and what shall I give thee in return?’
And the Star-Child said to it, ‘I am seeking for a piece of white gold, nor can I
anywhere find it, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me.’
‘Come thou with me,’ said the Hare, ‘and I will lead thee to it, for I know
where it is hidden, and for what purpose.’
So the Star-Child went with the Hare, and lo! in the cleft of a great oak-tree he
saw the piece of white gold that he was seeking. And he was filled with joy,
and seized it, and said to the Hare, ‘The service that I did to thee thou hast
rendered back again many times over, and the kindness that I showed thee
thou hast repaid a hundred-fold.’
‘Nay,’ answered the Hare, ‘but as thou dealt with me, so I did deal with thee,’
and it ran away swiftly, and the Star-Child went towards the city.
Now at the gate of the city there was seated one who was a leper. Over his
face hung a cowl of grey linen, and through the eyelets his eyes gleamed like
red coals. And when he saw the Star-Child coming, he struck upon a wooden
bowl, and clattered his bell, and called out to him, and said, ‘Give me a piece
of money, or I must die of hunger. For they have thrust me out of the city, and
there is no one who has pity on me.’
‘Alas!’ cried the Star-Child, ‘I have but one piece of money in my wallet, and
if I bring it not to my master he will beat me, for I am his slave.’
But the leper entreated him, and prayed of him, till the Star-Child had pity, and
gave him the piece of white gold.

And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and
brought him in, and said to him, ‘Hast thou the piece of white gold?’ And the
Star-Child answered, ‘I have it not.’ So the Magician fell upon him, and beat
him, and set before him an empty trencher, and said, ‘Eat,’ and an empty cup,
and said, ‘Drink,’ and flung him again into the dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, ‘If to-day thou
bringest me not the piece of yellow gold, I will surely keep thee as my slave,
and give thee three hundred stripes.’
So the Star-Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the piece
of yellow gold, but nowhere could he find it. And at sunset he sat him down
and began to weep, and as he was weeping there came to him the little Hare
that he had rescued from the trap,
And the Hare said to him, ‘Why art thou weeping? And what dost thou seek
in the wood?’
And the Star-Child answered, ‘I am seeking for a piece of yellow gold that is
hidden here, and if I find it not my master will beat me, and keep me as a
slave.’
‘Follow me,’ cried the Hare, and it ran through the wood till it came to a pool
of water. And at the bottom of the pool the piece of yellow gold was lying.
‘How shall I thank thee?’ said the Star-Child, ‘for lo! this is the second time
that you have succoured me.’
‘Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,’ said the Hare, and it ran away swiftly.
And the Star-Child took the piece of yellow gold, and put it in his wallet, and
hurried to the city. But the leper saw him coming, and ran to meet him, and
knelt down and cried, ‘Give me a piece of money or I shall die of hunger.’
And the Star-Child said to him, ‘I have in my wallet but one piece of yellow
gold, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me and keep me as his
slave.’
But the leper entreated him sore, so that the Star-Child had pity on him, and
gave him the piece of yellow gold.
And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and
brought him in, and said to him, ‘Hast thou the piece of yellow gold?’ And
the Star-Child said to him, ‘I have it not.’ So the Magician fell upon him, and
beat him, and loaded him with chains, and cast him again into the dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, ‘If to-day thou

bringest me the piece of red gold I will set thee free, but if thou bringest it not
I will surely slay thee.’
So the Star-Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the piece
of red gold, but nowhere could he find it. And at evening he sat him down and
wept, and as he was weeping there came to him the little Hare.
And the Hare said to him, ‘The piece of red gold that thou seekest is in the
cavern that is behind thee. Therefore weep no more but be glad.’
‘How shall I reward thee?’ cried the Star-Child, ‘for lo! this is the third time
thou hast succoured me.’
‘Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,’ said the Hare, and it ran away swiftly.
And the Star-Child entered the cavern, and in its farthest corner he found the
piece of red gold. So he put it in his wallet, and hurried to the city. And the
leper seeing him coming, stood in the centre of the road, and cried out, and
said to him, ‘Give me the piece of red money, or I must die,’ and the StarChild had pity on him again, and gave him the piece of red gold, saying, ‘Thy
need is greater than mine.’ Yet was his heart heavy, for he knew what evil fate
awaited him.
But lo! as he passed through the gate of the city, the guards bowed down and
made obeisance to him, saying, ‘How beautiful is our lord!’ and a crowd of
citizens followed him, and cried out, ‘Surely there is none so beautiful in the
whole world!’ so that the Star-Child wept, and said to himself, ‘They are
mocking me, and making light of my misery.’ And so large was the concourse
of the people that he lost the threads of his way, and found himself at last in a
great square, in which there was a palace of a King.
And the gate of the palace opened, and the priests and the high officers of the
city ran forth to meet him, and they abased themselves before him, and said,
‘Thou art our lord for whom we have been waiting, and the son of our King.’
And the Star-Child answered them and said, ‘I am no king’s son, but the child
of a poor beggar-woman. And how say ye that I am beautiful, for I know that
I am evil to look at?’
Then he, whose armour was inlaid with gilt flowers, and on whose helmet
crouched a lion that had wings, held up a shield, and cried, ‘How saith my lord
that he is not beautiful?’
And the Star-Child looked, and lo! his face was even as it had been, and his
comeliness had come back to him, and he saw that in his eyes which he had
not seen there before.

And the priests and the high officers knelt down and said to him, ‘It was
prophesied of old that on this day should come he who was to rule over us.
Therefore, let our lord take this crown and this sceptre, and be in his justice
and mercy our King over us.’
But he said to them, ‘I am not worthy, for I have denied the mother who bare
me, nor may I rest till I have found her, and known her forgiveness.
Therefore, let me go, for I must wander again over the world, and may not
tarry here, though ye bring me the crown and the sceptre.’ And as he spake he
turned his face from them towards the street that led to the gate of the city, and
lo! Amongst the crowd that pressed round the soldiers, he saw the beggarwoman who was his mother, and at her side stood the leper, who had sat by the
road.
And a cry of joy broke from his lips, and he ran over, and kneeling down he
kissed the wounds on his mother’s feet, and wet them with his tears. He
bowed his head in the dust, and sobbing, as one whose heart might break, he
said to her: ‘Mother, I denied thee in the hour of my pride. Accept me in the
hour of my humility. Mother, I gave thee hatred. Do thou give me love.
Mother, I rejected thee. Receive thy child now.’ But the beggar-woman
answered him not a word.
And he reached out his hands, and clasped the white feet of the leper, and said
to him: ‘Thrice did I give thee of my mercy. Bid my mother speak to me
once.’ But the leper answered him not a word.
And he sobbed again and said: ‘Mother, my suffering is greater than I can
bear. Give me thy forgiveness, and let me go back to the forest.’ And the
beggar-woman put her hand on his head, and said to him, ‘Rise,’ and the leper
put his hand on his head, and said to him, ‘Rise,’ also.
And he rose up from his feet, and looked at them, and lo! they were a King
and a Queen.
And the Queen said to him, ‘This is thy father whom thou hast succoured.’
And the King said, ‘This is thy mother whose feet thou hast washed with thy
tears.’ And they fell on his neck and kissed him, and brought him into the
palace and clothed him in fair raiment, and set the crown upon his head, and
the sceptre in his hand, and over the city that stood by the river he ruled, and
was its lord. Much justice and mercy did he show to all, and the evil Magician
he banished, and to the Woodcutter and his wife he sent many rich gifts, and to
their children he gave high honour. Nor would he suffer any to be cruel to
bird or beast, but taught love and loving-kindness and charity, and to the poor
he gave bread, and to the naked he gave raiment, and there was peace and
plenty in the land.

Yet ruled he not long, so great had been his suffering, and so bitter the fire of
his testing, for after the space of three years he died. And he who came after
him ruled evilly.

Liked This Book?
For More FREE e-Books visit Freeditorial.com

